‘And I hope not just you but our whole country will keep that spark alive. There is something cool about 
saying - I come from the land of a billion sparks. Thank you,’ I said, ending my motivational speech at Tilak 
Hall, Varanasi. The claps and whistles were my cue to leave. Security volunteers formed a human barricade 
and soon I managed a neat exit from the hall. ‘Thank you so much, sir’ someone said right behind me. I 
turned around to face my host. ‘Mr Mishra’ I said, ‘I was looking for you! ‘Please call me Gopal,’ he said. 
‘The car is over there! I walked out with the young director of GangaTech College, Gopal Mishra. His black 
Mercedes whisked us away from the crowded Vidyapath Road. ‘So you saw the temples and the ghats?’ 
Gopal asked. ‘That’s all Varanasi has, anyway! ‘Yeah, I went to the Vishwanath Temple and 
Dashashwamedh Ghat at five in the morning. I love this city,’ I said. ‘Oh, good. What did you like best 
about Varanasi?’ ‘Aarti,’ I said. ‘What?’ Gopal looked surprised. ‘The morning aarti at the ghats. I saw it for 
the first time, all those diyas floating at dawn. It was out of this world! Gopal frowned. ‘What?’ I said. 
‘Isn’t Varanasi’s aarti beautiful? ‘Yeah. Yeah, it is ... it is not that,’he said, but did not elaborate. ‘Will you 
drop me at Ramada Hotel?’ I said. ‘Your flight is only tomorrow morning,’ Gopal said. 'Why don't you 
come home for dinner?’ ‘Don’t be formal ...’I began.
‘You have to come home. We must have a drink together. I have the finest whisky in the world,’ he said. I 
smiled as I shook my head. ‘Thanks, Gopal, but I don’t drink much! ‘Chetan sir, one drink? I can tell people I 
had a drink with “the” Chetan Bhagat.’ I laughed. ‘That’s nothing to brag about. Still, say it if you want. 
You don’t actually have to drink with me! ‘Not like that, sir. I actually want to have a drink with you! I saw 
his intense eyes. He had sent me twenty invites in the last six months, until I finally agreed to come. I knew 
he could persist. ‘Okay, one drink!’ I said, hoping I wouldn’t regret this later. ‘Excellent,’ Gopal said. We 
drove ten kilometres outside the city on the Lucknow Highway to reach GangaTech. The guards saluted as 
the campus gates opened. The car came to a halt at a gray bungalow. It had a stone exterior that matched 
the main college and hostel buildings. We sat in the living room on the ground floor. It opened out to a 
badminton court-sized lawn. ‘Nice house,’ I said as I sat on a cushy brown velvet sofa. I noticed the extra-
high ceiling. ‘Thanks. I designed it myself. The contractor built it, but I supervised everything! Gopal said. 
He proceeded to the bar counter at the other end of the room. ‘It’s the bungalow of an engineering 
college director. You and your friends raided one, right?’ ‘How do you know?’ I said. ‘Everyone knows. 
We’ve read the book. Seen the movie! We laughed. He handed me a crystal glass filled with a generous 
amount of whisky. ‘Thank you! ‘Single malt, twelve years old,’ he said. ‘It’s the directors bungalow, but 
you don’t have a daughter’ I said. You aren’t even married. The youngest director I’ve ever seen! He 
smiled. ‘How old are you?’ I was curious.
‘Twenty-six,’ Gopal said, a hint of pride in his voice. 'Not just the youngest, but also the most uneducated 
director you’ve met.’ ‘Uneducated?’ ‘I never went to college ’ ‘What?’I said as I twirled the ice-cubes in my 
glass and wondered how potent this drink was. ‘Well, I did do a joke of a correspondence degree.’ ‘Wow!’ 
I said. ‘It isn’t a joke to open such a big college.’ ‘Sixteen hundred students now, Chetan-ji, across all 
batches. Each paying one lakh a year. We already have a sixteen-crore turnover. And you inaugurated the 
MBA coaching today. That’s another new business.’ I took a sip. The smooth whisky burnt my throat. ‘Do 
you have beer? Or wine?’ I coughed. Gopal’s face fell. Not only had I ignored his impressive business 
statistics, I had also rejected his whisky. ‘Not good?’ Gopal asked. ‘It’s Glenfiddich, four thousand a bottle. 
Should I open Blue Label? That’s ten thousand a bottle.’ It is not a price issue, I wanted to tell him but 
didn’t. T don’t drink whisky. Too strong for me’I said instead. Gopal laughed. ‘Live life. Start having fine 
whisky. You will develop a taste! I attempted another sip and winced. He smiled and poured more water in 
my drink to dilute it. It ruined the scotch, but saved my sanity. 'Life is to be enjoyed. Look at me, I will make 
four crores this year. What is the point if I don’t enjoy it?’ In most parts of the world, speaking about your 
income is taboo. In India, you share the figures like your zodiac sign, especially if you have lots. He seemed 
to have put the question more to himself than to me. His dark eyes continued to bore into me. They 
demanded attention. The rest of him - wheatish complexion, modestfive-feet-seven-inch height, side-
parted hair - was reassuringly normal. ‘Yeah, of course. One should enjoy...’ I said as he cut me.
‘Next year I will make five crores.’ I realised he would keep forecasting his salary until I demonstrated 
suitable awe. ‘Five crores!’ I said, my voice loud and fake. Gopal grinned. ‘Baby, eat this, for I have made 
it,’is probably the T-shirt slogan he would choose. ‘That’s incredible,’ I murmured, wondering how I could 
switch the topic. I noticed stairs winding up. ‘What’s upstairs?’ I said. 'Bedrooms and a terrace. Come, I 
will show you.’ We climbed up the steps and walked past a room with a luxurious kingsized bed. I took in 
the panoramic view from the terrace. ‘This was a wasteland, all of it. My grandfather s old agricultural 
land,’ Gopal said. 'Ten acres?’ I made a guess. ‘Fifteen. We had fifteen acres more,’ Gopal said, ‘but we 
sold it to fund the construction! He pointed to a small array of lights towards the eastern wall of the 
floodlit campus. ‘Right there, see. There is a mall coming up.’ ‘Every Indian city is building malls now,’ I 
said. ‘India shining, Chetan-ji,’ he said and clinked his glass with mine. Gopal drank more than four times 
my pace. I hadn’t finished my first when he poured his fifth. ‘You big-city types. Drinking for style,’ he 
teased when I refused a refill. ‘I don’t drink much. Really,’ I said. I checked the time; 10:00p.m. ‘At what 
time do you eat dinner?’ he asked. ‘Up to you,’ I said, though I wished he’d decide to eat right away. ‘What 
is the big hurry? Two men, one educated, one uneducated. Having a good time,’ Gopal said and raised his 
glass in the air. I nodded out of courtesy. My stomach rumbled for food. We came downstairs to sit down 
in the living room again.
‘Did you really go to the professor’s daughters house?’ Gopal asked. I smiled. ‘Love makes us do stupid 
things.’ Gopal laughed out loud.. He gulped his drink bottoms-up, then grabbed the half-empty bottle to 
make his sixth tipple. ‘Love? Forget stupid things. Love fucks you,’ Gopal said. ‘That’s harsh,’ I said. ‘Is that 
why there is no Mrs Director yet?’ Gopal’s hand trembled as he continued to pour his drink. I wondered if I 
should stop him from drinking more. ‘Mrs Director!’ Gopal smirked. He gripped the whisky bottle tight. 
‘Easy, Gopal, you are drinking too fast. It's dangerous.’ Gopal plonked the bottle on the coffee table. ‘Why 
dangerous? Who is going to fucking cry for me? If I live, I want to enjoy. If I die, who cares?’ ‘Your 
parents?’ Gopal shook his head. ‘Friends?’ ‘Successful people don’t have friends,’ Gopal averred. 'It’s true, 
no?’ His lavish house felt cold and isolated. I took the whisky bottle and placed it back in the bar. 
'Pessimist, eh?’ I said. 'Surprising, given you are doing so well’ ‘What well, Chetan-ji?’ Gopal said, now 
completely drunk and, presumably, completely honest. He pointed to the huge TV, stereo system and the 
silk carpet under our feet in quick succession. ‘What does all this mean? I’ve lived with nothing.. ’ Our 
conversation had become serious. I patted his back to cheer him up. ‘So you read about my girlfriend in the 
book. How about you? You ever had one?’ Gopal didn’t respond, but looked distraught. He placed his glass 
on the coffee table. Touchy topic, I figured too late. He retched. ‘Are you okay?’ I said.
He ran to the restroom. I heard him throw up. I browsed the display shelves to pass time. I saw framed 
news stories about GangaTech, trophies, pictures of Gopal with guests who had visited the college. I 
wondered if my picture would also be there soon. When he hadn’t returned in twenty minutes I called for 
the maid. She took me to the bathroom. I knocked at the door. No answer. I banged my fists on the door. 
Nothing. 'Looks like we will have to break the door’ the maid said. I wondered how I, who had come as a 
chief guest for a college orientation programme, became involved with forcing open random toilets in 
Varanasi. ? The rustle of sheets on the hospital bed woke me from my nap. The bedside clock showed 3:00 
a.m. I had brought a passed-out Gopal to the Heritage Hospital, in the Lanka area of Varanasi. Gopal sat up 
on the bed now, massaging his temples. His hangover reminded me of my college days. However, here the 
director had binged on alcohol, not a student. ‘You were here all night?’ He looked surprised. ‘I could not 
let my host die on me,’ I said. ‘I am sorry. I had a bit too much.’ Gopal gave a sheepish grin. ‘Are you 
alright?’ ‘Yeah, I am good.’ ‘Not right now. Are you okay generally?’ He turned his head to stare at the 
opposite wall. ‘How’s life, Gopal?’ I asked softly. He didn’t answer. I stood up after a minute. ‘I should 
leave, catch some sleep before my flight.’ I walked to the door. ‘Do you think I am a good person, Chetan-
ji?’ he said. I turned around.
‘Am I?’ he asked again. I shrugged my shoulders. ‘I don’t know you, Gopal. You organised the talk well. 
Treated me good. You seem fine,’I said. ‘You think so?’ ‘You’ve achieved a lot. Take it easy. Even 
expensive whiskies can be harmful! He smiled and gave a brief nod. ‘I will drink less’ he said. ‘Anything 
else?’ You are young. Don’t give up on love yet ’ I said, checking my watch. ‘I really should go. It is almost 
time for the morning aarti! "That’s her name,’ he said. I didn’t want to stay any longer, but I was hooked. 
'What name? Whose name?’I asked even as I reminded myself that this was not my business and I should 
leave soon. ‘Aarti,’ he said. ‘Aarti who? Someone you like?’ I hazarded a guess. ‘Like is not the word, 
Chetan-ji! ‘You loved her?’ I smiled. ‘Imagine every sadhu and priest in Varanasi. More than all their 
devotion put together, that’s how much I loved her.’ I absorbed the analogy. Curiosity had taken over my 
need for sleep. I allowed myself to ask one more question. ‘She loved you too?’ He mulled over the 
question for a while. ‘She didn’t just love me, she owned me! I shifted from one foot to the other. I had a 
long day ahead. A sleepless night would be a bad idea. But I heard my self asking him, ‘So what happened? 
Between you and Aarti! Gopal smiled. ‘This is not an interview, Chetan-ji. Either you sit down and listen to 
this stupid mans whole story or you leave. Up to you! His charcoal eyes met mine. Something about the 
young director intrigued me. His unusual achievements, his cockiness, his tortured voice or maybe this 
strange holy city made me want to know more about him. I let out a huge sigh. He pointed to the chair 
next to him. ‘Okay, tell me your story! I said and sat down.
‘Do you want another drink?’ Gopal said. I glared at him. He laughed. ‘I meant tea,’ he said. We ordered a 
pot of extra-hot masala tea and glucose biscuits; nothing complements a conversation better. ‘Where do I 
start?’ Gopal said. 'Let’s begin with Aarti. The girl who did this to you.’ ‘Aarti? She got me into trouble the 
first day we met,’ Gopal said. I dipped a biscuit in my tea and listened.
1 Lazy parents, bread-butter again,’ I grumbled, shutting a blue plastic tiffin in the second row. Raghav and 
I moved to the next desk. ‘Forget it, Gopal. The class will be back any time,’ Raghav said. ‘Shh .. ‘I’ve 
brought puri-aloo, we can share that. It’s wrong to steal from others.’ I battled a small, round steel tiffin 
box. ‘How does one open this?’ Neither of us had the sharp nails required to open the thin steel lid of the 
stubborn box. We had skipped the morning assembly for our weekly tiffin raid. We had ten more minutes 
till the national anthem began outside. After that class 5 C would be back. We had to find, eat and keep the 
tiffins back within that time. ‘Its pickle and parathas,’ Raghav said, having opened the lid. ‘You want it?’ 
‘Forget it,’ I said as I returned the steel box to the student’s bag. My eyes darted from one bag to another. 
‘This one’ I said, pointing to a pink imported rucksack in the first row. ‘That bag looks
expensive. She must be getting good food. Come.’ We rushed to the target’s seat. I grabbed the Barbie 
bag, unzipped the front flap and found a red, shiny, rectangular tiffin. The cover had a spoon 
compartment. ‘Fancy box!’ I said, clicking the lid open. Idlis, a little box of chutney and a large piece of 
chocolate cake. We’d hit the jackpot. ‘I only want the cake,’ I said as 1 lifted the huge slice. ‘Don’t take the 
whole thing. It’s not fair,’ Raghav said. ‘If I eat only a bit, she will get to know,’ I scowled. ‘Cut it into two. 
Take one, leave the other,’ Raghav said. ‘Cut with what?’ ‘Use a ruler,’ he suggested. I ran to my desk. I 
brought back a ruler and made a clean cut. ‘Fine?’ I said. ‘Happy now?’ ‘Its her cake.’ Raghav shrugged. 
‘But you are my friend,’ I said. I offered a bite. He refused. I had not had any breakfast at home. I gorged 
on the cake, my fingers smeared with icing. ‘Why don’t you get your own tiffin?’ Raghav said. I spoke with 
my mouth stuffed. ‘It will mean extra work for Baba. He makes lunch and dinner anyway.’ ‘So?’ ‘I tell him I 
don’t feel hungry.’ My father taught in a government school. He left home at six, even earlier than me. I 
licked the chocolate cream off my fingers. We could hear the national anthem. ‘I can bring tiffin for you,’ 
Raghav said and made me stand up along with him for the anthem. ‘Forget it, your mom cooks boring 
stuff. Puri everyday,’ I said. We heard students chatter on their way back to class. I stuffed the remaining 
cake into my mouth. ‘Hurry, hurry,’ Raghav said. I shut the red tiffin box and placed it back in the Barbie 
bag.
‘Who sits here anyway?’ Raghav asked. I fumbled through the pink rucksack and found a brown-paper-
covered notebook. I read out the label on the cover, ‘Aarti Pratap Pradhan, Subject: Maths, Class 5, 
Section C, Age 10, Roll number 1, Sunbeam School.’ ‘Whatever. Are we done?’ Raghav said. I hung the bag 
back on Aarti’s chair, in its original place. ‘Let’s go,’ I said. We ran to our back-row seats, sat and put our 
heads down on the desk. We closed our eyes and pretended to be sick, the reason for skipping the morning 
assembly. The entire 5 C entered the room, filling the class with the simultaneous cacophony of four dozen 
tenyear-olds. ‘Cut it into two. Take one, leave the other,’ Raghav said. ‘Cut with what?’ ‘Use a ruler,’ he 
suggested. I ran to my desk. I brought back a ruler and made a clean cut. ‘Fine?’ I said. ‘Happy now?’ ‘Its 
her cake.’ Raghav shrugged. ‘But you are my friend,’ I said. I offered a bite. He refused. I had not had any 
breakfast at home. I gorged on the cake, my fingers smeared with icing. ‘Why don’t you get your own 
tiffin?’ Raghav said. I spoke with my mouth stuffed. ‘It will mean extra work for Baba. He makes lunch and 
dinner anyway.’ ‘So?’ ‘I tell him I don’t feel hungry.’ My father taught in a government school. He left 
home at six, even earlier than me. I licked the chocolate cream off my fingers. We could hear the national 
anthem. ‘I can bring tiffin for you,’ Raghav said and made me stand up along with him for the anthem. 
‘Forget it, your mom cooks boring stuff. Puri everyday,’ I said. We heard students chatter on their way 
back to class. I stuffed the remaining cake into my mouth. ‘Hurry, hurry,’ Raghav said.
I shut the red tiffin box and placed it back in the Barbie bag. ‘Who sits here anyway?’ Raghav asked. I 
fumbled through the pink rucksack and found a brown-paper-covered notebook. I read out the label on the 
cover, ‘Aarti Pratap Pradhan, Subject: Maths, Class 5, Section C, Age 10, Roll number 1, Sunbeam School.’ 
‘Whatever. Are we done?’ Raghav said. I hung the bag back on Aarti’s chair, in its original place. ‘Let’s go,’ 
I said. We ran to our back-row seats, sat and put our heads down on the desk. We closed our eyes and 
pretended to be sick, the reason for skipping the morning assembly. The entire 5 C entered the room, filling 
the class with the simultaneous cacophony of four dozen tenyear-olds. Simaran Gill madam, our class 
teacher, arrived a minute later and the noise died down. ‘Multiplication,’ she wrote on the board, even as 
the children were still settling down. I sat up straight and craned my neck to see Aarti Pratap Pradhan, roll 
number one. She wore a white skirt, white shirt, red cardigan and had ribbons in her plaits, and she faced 
the teacher most seriously as she sat down. ‘Eww,’ Aarti screamed and jumped up. She picked up a 
chocolate-stained ruler from her seat. The back of her skirt had chocolate stains. ‘Oh my God!’ Aarti’s shrill 
voice made the entire class take notice. ‘Aarti, sit down!’ Gill madam screamed in a voice loud enough to 
make the back rows shiver. Gill madam didn’t like noise, even if it came from girls with cute plaits. Raghav 
and I exchanged a worried glance. We had left behind evidence. ‘Madam, someone has put a dirty ruler on 
my seat. My new school dress is spoiled,’ Aarti wailed. The whole class laughed and Aarti broke into tears. 
‘What?’ the teacher said. She placed the chalk down, dusted her hands and took the ruler from Aarti. Aarti 
continued to sniffle. The teacher walked along the aisles. Students shrank in their seats as she passed 
them. ‘Who brought chocolate cake today?’ she launched into an investigation. ‘I did,’ Aarti said. She 
opened her tiffin and realised how her own cake had been used to ruin her dress. Her howls reached new 
decibel levels. ‘Someone ate my cake,’ Aarti cried so loud, the adjacent class 5 B could hear us.
Half your cake, I wanted to tell her. Raghav stared at me. ‘Confess?’ he whispered. ‘Are you mad?’ I 
whispered back. When Gill madam walked by, I stared at the floor. She wore golden slippers with fake 
crystals on the strap. I clenched my fists. My fingers were greasy. The teacher walked back to the front of 
the class. She took out a tissue from her purse and wiped the ruler clean. ‘Admit it, else the punishment will 
be worse,’ she warned. I pretended not to hear and opened my maths notebook. ‘Who is GM?’ the teacher 
asked. She had read my initials. I had scraped them with a compass on my ruler. Damn! We had two GMs in 
the class. One, Girish Mathur, sat in the first row. He stood up without provocation. ‘I didn’t do it, ma’am,’ 
he said and pinched his neck. ‘God promise, ma’am.’ The teacher squinted at him, still suspicious. ‘I swear 
upon Ganga, ma’am,’ Girish said as he broke down. The Ganga reference worked. Everyone believed him. 
‘Who’s the other GM? Gopal Mishra!’ the teacher shouted my name. All eyes turned to me. The teacher 
walked up to my desk. I stood up. I didn’t say a word. Neither did the teacher. Slap, Slap! Both my cheeks 
were stinging. ‘Stealing food? Are you a thief?’ the teacher said. She looked at me as if I had stolen the 
Kohinoor diamond from the British queen’s museum, something the social studies teacher had told us 
about two days ago. I hung my head low. She smacked the back of my neck. ‘Get out of my class!’ I 
dragged my feet out of the class, even as the entire 5 C stared at me. ‘Aarti, go clean up in the bathroom,’ 
Gill madam said. ? I leaned against the wall outside the class. Aarti wiped her eyes and walked past me 
towards the
toilet. ‘Drama queen! It was only half a slice of chocolate cake!’ I thought. Anyway, that’s how I, Gopal 
Mishra, met the great Aarti Pratap Pradhan. I must tell you, even though this is my story, you won’t like me 
very much. After all, a ten-year-old thief isn’t exactly a likeable person to begin with. Dubey uncle, our 
lawyer, pushed a small box of four laddoos towards us. ‘Sweets? What for?’ my father said. Dubey uncle 
had come home. Baba and I faced him across our ancient dining table. ‘You’ve got a hearing date,’ Dubey 
uncle said. ‘Ibis itself took so long, I thought we should celebrate.’ I wondered if I could give some laddoos 
to drama queen Aarti as compensation for the cake. I wanted to buy a chocolate cake and slam it on her 
desk. However, I didn’t have money for that. My father didn’t give me any pocket money, and he didn’t 
have much money in his own pocket. My mother’s illness had wiped out all his savings. She died two weeks 
after I turned four. 1 don’t remember much of her or her death. Baba did say he had to wear her dupatta 
and sleep next to me for a month. After her death the land dispute started. Dubey uncle had become a 
frequent visitor to our house for this reason. ‘You brought sweets only because we have a hearing?’ Baba 
coughed. The case had not given his land back to him, but it did worsen his respiratory ailment. ‘Well, 
Ghanshyam wants to settle the case out of court,’ Dubey uncle said. Ghanshyam taya-ji, my father’s 
respected elder brother, had screwed us. My grandfather had left his two sons thirty acres of agricultural 
land on the Lucknow Highway, to be divided equally. Soon after my grandfather’s death, Ghanshyam uncle 
took a loan from the bank and mortgaged Baba’s The teacher walked back to the front of the class. She 
took out a tissue from her purse and wiped the ruler clean. ‘Admit it, else the punishment will be worse,’ 
she warned. I pretended not to hear and opened my maths notebook. ‘Who is GM?’ the teacher asked. She 
had read my initials. I had scraped them with a compass on my ruler. Damn! We had two GMs in the class. 
One, Girish Mathur, sat in the first row. He stood up without provocation. ‘I didn’t do it, ma’am,’ he said 
and pinched his neck. ‘God promise, ma’am.’
The teacher squinted at him, still suspicious. ‘I swear upon Ganga, ma’am,’ Girish said as he broke down. 
The Ganga reference worked. Everyone believed him. ‘Who’s the other GM? Gopal Mishra!’ the teacher 
shouted my name. All eyes turned to me. The teacher walked up to my desk. I stood up. I didn’t say a word. 
Neither did the teacher. Slap, Slap! Both my cheeks were stinging. ‘Stealing food? Are you a thief?’ the 
teacher said. She looked at me as if I had stolen the Kohinoor diamond from the British queen’s museum, 
something the social studies teacher had told us about two days ago. I hung my head low. She smacked 
the back of my neck. ‘Get out of my class!’ I dragged my feet out of the class, even as the entire 5 C stared 
at me. ‘Aarti, go clean up in the bathroom,’ Gill madam said. ? I leaned against the wall outside the class. 
Aarti wiped her eyes and walked past me towards the toilet. ‘Drama queen! It was only half a slice of 
chocolate cake!’ I thought. Anyway, that’s how I, Gopal Mishra, met the great Aarti Pratap Pradhan. I must 
tell you, even though this is my story, you won’t like me very much. After all, a ten-year-old thief isn’t 
exactly a likeable person to begin with. I come from Varanasi, which my social studies teacher says is one 
of the oldest cities on earth. People came to live here in 1200 BC. The city gets its name from two rivers, 
Varuna and Asi , which pass through the city and meet the Ganga. People call my city several names - 
Kashi, Benares or banaras - depending on where they come from. some call it the city of Temples, for we 
have thousands of them, and some the city of learning, as  Varanasi apparently  has great places to study. I 
simply call Varanasi my home. I stay near Gadholia, a place so noisy, you need to put cotton balls in your 
ears if you want sleep. Gadholia is near the ghats, along the river Ganga. So the crowds of Gadholia 
becomes too much to take, you can always run to the ghats and sit by the Ganga and watch the temples. 
Some call my city beautiful,holy and spiritual - especially when we have to introduce it to foregin tourists. 
Many call it filthy and a dump. I don't think my city is dirty. It is the people who make it dirty. Anyway, they 
say you must come to Varanasi once in a lifetime. Well, some of us spend a lifetime here.
 I had pencil in my pocket. I used it to scribble '5 c' on the wall It had helped me pass the time, and would 
make our class easier to find too. She came out of the toilet - face wet, drama-queen expression intact 
and gaze firmly fixed on me - and walked back to the class.    She continued to stare at me as she came 
closer. 'You are scribbling on the walls!' she said.     'Go complain,' I said. 'Go'      'How can you steal my 
tiffin?' she said.      'I didn't steal your tiffin,' I said 'I had three bites of your chocolate cake. You wouldn't 
even have noticed.'      'You are a really bad boy.' Aarti said.     Dubey uncle, our lawyer, pushed a small box 
of four laddoos towards us. ‘Sweets? What for?’ my father said. Dubey uncle had come home. Baba and I 
faced him across our ancient dining table. ‘You’ve got a hearing date,’ Dubey uncle said. ‘This itself took so 
long, I thought we should celebrate.’ I wondered if I could give some laddoos to drama queen Aarti as 
compensation for the cake. I wanted to buy a chocolate cake and slam it on her desk. However, I didn’t 
have money for that. My father didn’t give me any pocket money, and he didn’t have much money in his 
own pocket. My mother’s illness had wiped out all his savings. She died two weeks after I turned four. 1 
don’t remember much of her or her death. Baba did say he had to wear her dupatta and sleep next to me 
for a month. After her death the land dispute started. Dubey uncle had become a frequent visitor to our 
house for this reason. ‘You brought sweets only because we have a hearing?’ Baba coughed. The case had 
not given his land back to him, but it did worsen his respiratory ailment. ‘Well, Ghanshyam wants to settle 
the case out of court,’ Dubey uncle said. Ghanshyam taya-ji, my father’s respected elder brother, had 
screwed us. My grandfather had left his two sons thirty acres of agricultural land on the Lucknow Highway, 
to be divided equally. Soon after my grandfather’s death, Ghanshyam uncle took a loan from the bank and 
mortgaged Baba’s 1 come from Varanasi, which my social studies teacher says is one of the oldest cities 
on earth.
People came to live here in 1200 BC. The city gets its name from two rivers, Varuna and Asi, which pass 
through the city and meet the Ganga. People call my city several names - Kashi, Benares or Banaras - 
depending on where they come from. Some call it the City of Temples, for we have thousands of them, 
and some the City of Learning, as Varanasi apparently has great places to study. I simply call Varanasi my 
home. I stay near Gadhoiia, a place so noisy, you need to put cotton balls in your ears if you want to sleep. 
Gadhoiia is near the ghats, along the river Ganga. So if the crowds of Gadhoiia become too much to take, 
you can always run to the ghats and sit by the Ganga and watch the temples. Some call my city beautiful, 
holy and spiritual - especially when we have to introduce it to foreign tourists. Many call it filthy and a 
dump. I don't think my city is dirty. It is the people who make it dirty. Anyway, they say you must come to 
Varanasi once in a lifetime. Well, some of us spend a lifetime here. I had a pencil in my pocket. I used it to 
scribble ‘5 C on the wall. It helped me pass the time, and would make our class easier to find too. She came 
out of the toilet - face wet, drama-queen expression intact and gaze firmly fixed on me - and walked back 
to the class. She continued to stare at me as she came closer. ‘You are scribbling on the walls!’ she said. 
‘Go complain,’ I said. ‘Go.’ ‘How can you steal my tiffin?’ she said. ‘I didn’t steal your tiffin’ I said. ‘I had 
three bites of your chocolate cake. You wouldn’t even have noticed.’ ‘You are a really bad boy,’ Aarti said. 
half of the property, forging the papers with wrong plot numbers and bribing the bank officer. Ghanshyam 
taya-ji made bad business decisions and lost the money. The bank sent a foreclosure notice to us. Baba 
protested, and the bank slapped cases on both my father and uncle. The two brothers slapped cases on 
each other. All these cases moved through our legal system slower than a bullock cart on the national 
highway. ‘Settle?’ My father leaned forward. I picked up a laddoo and put it in my pocket. ‘Ghanshyam will 
give you some cash. He will take your share of the land and handle the bank and legal cases’ Dubey uncle 
said. ‘How much?’ Baba asked.
‘Ten lakhs,’ Dubey uncle replied. My father kept quiet. I snuck away another laddoo. She should be happy 
with two, I thought. ‘I admit the offer is ridiculously low for fifteen acres,’ Dubey uncle continued. ‘But 
there’s a loan of a crore on your property.’ ‘It’s not my loan!’ Baba said in an uncharacteristically loud 
voice. ‘He submitted your documents to the bank. Why did you give him your property papers?’ ‘He is my 
elder brother,’ Baba said, fighting tears. The loss of a brother hurt him more than the loss of land. ‘If you 
want more money, I can ask him. Why drag this forever?’ Dubey uncle said. ‘I am a farmer’s son. I am not 
giving up my land,’ Baba said, his eyes red. ‘Not until I die. Tell him to kill me if he wants the land.’ Baba 
then stared at me as my hand reached for the third laddoo. ‘It’s okay, take all of them,’ Dubey uncle told 
me. I looked at both of them, picked up the box and ran out of the room. ? I placed the box on her desk 
with a thump. ‘What is this?’ She looked at me primly. ‘I ate your cake. I’m sorry’ I said, my last word faint. 
‘I don’t like laddoos,’ she announced. ‘Why? You firang or what?’ I said. ‘No, laddoos make you fat. I don’t 
want to be fat,3 she said. ‘Chocolate cake doesn’t make you fat?’ ‘I don’t want it,’ she said. She gently 
pushed the box towards me. ‘Fine,’ I said and took the box. ‘Did you say sorry?’ Aarti said. ‘Yes, I did.’ I 
noticed her loopy plaits, tied up with red ribbons. She looked like a cartoon character. ‘Apology accepted,’ 
she said.
‘Thank you,’ I said. ‘Sure you don’t want the laddoos?’ ‘No, fat girls cant become air hostesses,’ she said. 
‘You want to be an air hostess?’ I said. ‘Yes.’ ‘Why?’ ‘They fly everywhere. I want to see different places.’ 
‘Okay.’ ‘What do you want to be?’ Aarti said. I shrugged my shoulders. ‘A rich man,’ I said. She nodded, as 
if my choice was reasonable. ‘Are you poor right now?’ ‘Yes’ I said. She said, ‘I am rich. We have a car.’ 
‘We don’t have a car. Okay, bye.’ I turned to leave when Aarti spoke again. ‘Why doesn’t your mother give 
you a tiffin?’ ‘I don’t have a mother,’ I said. ‘Dead?’ she asked. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘Okay, bye.’ I came back to my 
seat, I opened the box of laddoos and took one out. Aarti walked up to me. ‘What?’ I asked. ‘You can eat 
my tiffin sometimes. Don’t take a lot though. And don’t take any cake or nice treats’ ‘Thanks’ I said.
‘And don’t make a mess. If you want, we can eat together during lunch-break.’ ‘You won’t have enough 
food for yourself,’ I said. ‘It’s okay. I am dieting. I don’t want to be fat,’ Aarti said. Seven Years Later Walk 
me home first. Then go to the cricket ground,’ Aarti said. We were coming back after an afternoon of 
boating on the Ganga. Aarti and I had been doing this every week for the iast five years. Phoolchand bhai, 
a boatman at Assi Ghat, let me borrow his boat. We walked down a bylane narrow enough to jam a fat 
cow, and came out on the main road adjacent to the ghats. ‘I’m already late, Aarti. Raghav will scream at 
me.’ ‘So let me come with you. I don’t want to be bored at home,’ she said. ‘No.’ ‘Why?’ she blinked. ‘Too 
many boys. Remember the whistles last time?’ ‘I can handle it,’ Aarti said. She brushed some strands of 
hair away from her forehead. I looked at her beautiful face. ‘You have no idea what you do to them,’ I 
said. You have no idea what you do to me, was what I actually wanted to tell her. Aarti’s looks had always 
drawn appreciative comments from the school teachers. However, two years ago when she turned fifteen, 
the whole school started talking about her. Statements such as ‘the most beautiful girl in Sunbeam School’, 
she should be an actress’, or ‘she can apply for Miss India’ became increasingly common. Some of it came 
from people trying to please her. After all, a senior IAS officer father and a prominent ex-politician 
grandfather meant people wanted to be in her good books. But yes, Aarti did make Varanasi skip a 
heartbeat. Her entry into the Sigra Stadium cricket ground would definitely disrupt the game. Batsmen 
would miss the bail, fielders would miss catches and jobless morons would whistle in the way they do to 
give UP a bad name. ‘I’ve not met Raghav for so long,’ Aarti said. ‘Let’s go. I will watch you play.’
‘You will meet him at tuitions tomorrow,’ I said curtly. ‘Go home now.’ 'You want me to walk home 
alone?’ 'Take a rickshaw,’ I said. She grabbed my wrist. ‘You are coming with me right now.’ She held my 
hand and swung it back and forth as I walked her home. I wanted to tell her not to hold my hand anymore. 
It is fine at twelve, not at seventeen. Even though I liked it more at seventeen than at twelve. ‘What?’ she 
said. ‘Why are you staring? I am only holding your hand so that you don’t run away.’ I smiled. We walked 
past the noisy shopping streets to the calmer Cantonment area. We reached the bungalow of District 
Magistrate Pratap Brij Pradhan, Aarti’s father. The evening sky had turned a deep orange. Raghav was sure 
to sulk, as it would be too late to play. However, I could not refuse Aarti. ‘Thank you,’ Aarti said in a child-
like voice. ‘Coming in?’ ‘No, I am already late,’ 1 said. Our eyes met I broke eye contact quickly. Best 
friends, that’s all we were, I told myself. Her hair blew in the breeze and wisps of black gently stroked her 
face. ‘I should cut my hair, so hard to maintain,’ Aarti said. ‘Don’t,’ I said firmly. Tm keeping it long only for 
you. Bye!’ she said. I wondered if she had also started to feei differently about me. But I didn’t know how 
to ask. ‘See you at tuitions,’ I said, walking away. ‘Raghav Kashyap,’ the teacher called out and held up an 
answer-sheet. Raghav, Aarti and I had joined JSR coaching classes in Durgakund to prepare for the 
engineering entrance exams. JSR, named after its three founders - Mr Jha, Mr Singh and Mr Rai - 
conducted frequent mock-tests for AIEEE (All India Engineering Entrance Exam) and the IIT JEE (Indian 
Institute of Technology Joint Entrance Exam). The AIEEE attracted ten lakh students annually for thirty 
thousand seats in the National Institutes of Technology (NITs) across the country. Every engineering 
aspirant took these exams. I didn’t particularly want to become an engineer. Baba wished to see me as 
one, and that was why I went to JSR.
Raghav walked past the forty students in the crammed classroom to collect his answer-sheet. ‘Sixty-six out 
of eighty. Well done, Raghav,’ the teacher said. ‘IIT material,’ a boy whispered as Raghav walked past. ‘He 
is a topper from Sunbeam.’ I could totally see Raghav follow in the footsteps of his IITian father, an 
engineer in BHEL. I scored fifty out of eighty, a borderline performance, good enough to become the 
twelfth man on a cricket team, but not quite player material. ‘Focus, Gopal,’ the teacher said. ‘You need 
sixty-plus to be safe.’ I nodded. I wanted to get into a good engineering college. My father hadn’t heard 
any good news in years. ‘Aarti Pradhan!’ the teacher called out. The entire class turned to look at the girl in 
the white salwarkameez, who made the otherwise drab coaching classes worthwhile. Aarti took her 
answer-sheet and giggled. ‘Twenty out of eighty is funny?’ the teacher frowned. Aarti covered her mouth 
with her palm and walked back. She had no intention of becoming an engineer. She had joined JSR because 
a) attending coaching classes could supplement her class XII CBSE studies, b) I had also enrolled so she 
would have company and c) the tuition centre never charged her, given her father was about to become 
the District Magistrate, or DM of the city. Aarti’s father had a relatively honest reputation. However, free 
tuitions came under the ambit of acceptable favours. I have not even filled the AIEEE form,' Aarti 
whispered to me. ? ‘My AIEEE rank is going to be horrible’ I said to Raghav as I stirred my lemonade. We 
had come to the German Bakery near Narad Ghat, a touristy firang joint where white people felt safe from 
germs and the touts roaming around Varanasi. People sat on beds with wooden trays to eat firang food 
like sandwiches and pancakes. Two malnourished, old men played the sitar in one corner to give the 
Varanasi effect, as white people found it a cultural experience. I never thought much of the place. 
However, Aarti liked it. ‘I like how she has used a scarf to tie her hair,’ Aarti said, pointing at a female 
tourist. She had obviously ignored my AIEEE concerns. ‘Ten more marks and you will be fine. Relax,’ 
Raghav said.
‘One lakh students stand between me and those ten marks,’ I said. ‘Don’t think about the others. Focus on 
yourself,’ he said. I nodded slowly. Easy to give advice when you are the topper. I imagined myself in a sea, 
along with lakhs of other low-rankers, kicking and screaming to breathe. The waters closed over us, 
making us irrelevant to the Indian education system. Three weeks and the AIEEE tsunami would arrive. 
Aarti snapped her fingers in front of my face. ‘Wake up, dreamer, you will be fine,’ she said. ‘You are 
skipping it?’ Raghav turned to Aarti. ‘Yeah,’ she giggled. ‘Main Hoon Na is releasing that week. How can I 
miss a Shah Rukh film? They should postpone AIEEE.’ ‘Very funny’ I grimaced. ‘So you aren’t becoming an 
engineer. What will you do in life?’ Raghav asked Aarti. ‘Do I have to do something? I am an Indian 
woman. Can’t I get married, stay home and cook? Or ask the servants to cook?’ She laughed and Raghav 
joined her. I didn’t find this funny. 1 could not think beyond the teeming millions of wannabe engineers 
who would wrestle me down in three weeks. ‘Why so serious, Gopal-ji?  Im joking. You know I cant sit at 
home.’ Aarti tapped my shoulder. ‘Shut up, Aarti,’ I said. ‘Yeah, I know you want to be an air hostess’ ‘Air 
hostess? Wow!’ Raghav said. ‘That’s not fair, Gopal!’ Aarti screamed. ‘You are telling the world my secret.’ 
‘It’s only me,’ Raghav said. Aarti gave me a dirty look. ‘Sorry,’ I said. Aarti and I had a deeper relationship. 
We saw Raghav as a friend, but not a close one. ‘You will make a great air hostess,’ Raghav said, his tone 
flirtatious. ‘Yeah, whatever,’ Aarti said. ‘Like dad is going to let me leave Varanasi, ’[here are no airlines 
here. Only temples. Maybe I can be a temple hostess. Sir, please take a seat on the floor. Prayers will begin 
soon. Prasad will be served in your seats’
Raghav laughed again, holding his muscular abdomen. I hate people who are naturally gifted with a flat 
stomach. Why couldn’t god make six-packs a default standard in all males? Did we have to store fat in the 
silliest places? Raghav high-lived Aarti. My ears went hot. 'The sitar players started an energetic tune. 
‘Aarti, what nonsense you talk,’ I said, my voice loud. The foreigners around us, here in a worldwide quest 
for peace, became alert. I didn’t like the we find each other's lame jokes funny vibe between Raghav and 
Aarti. Raghav sucked the straw in his lemonade too hard. The drink came out through his nose. ‘Gross!’ 
Aarti said as both of them started a laugh-fest again. I stood up. ‘What happened?’ Raghav said. lI have to 
go. Baba is waiting,’ I said.                                                ? The sound of Baba’s coughing drowned out the 
sound of the doorbell the first couple of times. ‘Sorry, I couldn’t hear,’ he said, opening the door. ‘You 
okay?’ I asked. ‘Yes, it is the usual. I’ve made dal and roti.’ ‘That’s the usual too.’ My father had turned 
sixty last year. His non-stop coughing bouts made him look like an eighty-yearold. The doctors had given 
up. We had no money for surgery either. His school had fired him long ago. You can’t conduct a fifty-
minute class with ten respiratory breaks. He had a pension that lasted us three weeks in a good month. I 
ate in silence at the wobbly dining table. ‘Entrance exam ..my father started and paused to cough five 
times, I understood his drift. ‘I have finished the AIEEE preparation,’ I said. ‘JEE?’ Baba said. It is harder to 
manage family expectations than prepare for exams. ‘Don’t have IIT hopes for me, Baba,’ I said. My 
father’s face fell. ‘I will take the JEE. But, three
thousand out of four lakhs ... Imagine the odds’ ‘You can do it. You are bright,’ Baba said, paternal love 
obviously overestimating progeny’s abilities. I nodded. I had a shot at AIEEE, none at JEE. That was how I 
looked at it. I wondered if Baba realised that a rank would mean me leaving home. What if I had to go to 
NIT Agartala? Or somewhere far south? ‘Engineering is not everything, Baba,’ I said. It secures your life. 
Don’t fight now, right before the exams’ ‘I’m not fighting. I’m not.’ Post-dinner, Baba lay down on his bed. 
I sat next to him and pressed his forehead. He erupted into a coughing fit. ‘We should consider the 
surgery,’ I said. 'For two lakhs?’ Baba said, lying back and shutting his eyes. I resumed the massage. I kept 
quiet. I didn’t want to bring up the touchy topic. We could have settled the land issue ages ago. Court 
hearings still haunted us, the land lay barren, and we had no money. ‘From where will we get the money, 
tell?’ my father said. ‘You become an engineer. Get a good job. Then we will do the surgery.’ I could not 
stay quiet anymore. ‘Taya-ji offered ten lakhs. The money would have doubled in the bank by now.’ Baba 
opened bis eyes. ‘What about the land?’ he said. ‘What use is the stupid land?’ ‘Don’t talk like that,’ he 
said, pushing my hand away. ‘A farmer doesn’t insult his land. He doesn’t sell it either.’ I placed my hand 
back on his forehead. ‘We are not farmers anymore, Baba. We can’t use the land. Because your own 
brother ...’ ‘Go. Go and study, you have your exams coming up.’ Baba pointed to my room. The landline 
rang at midnight. I picked it up, ‘I’m sleepy, Aarti,’ I said.
‘You don’t sleep till one. Stop fibbing.’ ‘What’s up?’ ‘Nothing, (list felt like chatting.’ ‘Chat with someone 
else,’ I said. ‘Aha,’ she said. ‘1 know whals bothering you.’ ‘Bye, Aarti,’ I said. ‘Hey, wait. I found some of 
Raghav’s jokes funny. That’s all. You are still my best friend.’ ‘They weren’t funny. And what’s this best 
friend business?’ I said. ‘We’ve been best friends for eight years, though you still haven’t bought me a 
chocolate cake’ ‘And Raghav?’ ‘Raghav is only a friend. I talk to him because you are close to him,’ Aarti 
said. I kept silent. ‘Chill now, Gopal. How’re things at home?' she said. ‘Screwed up as always. How are 
you?’ ‘I’m fine. Dad insists I finish college before I try any of this air hostess business. But you can even 
become one straight after class XII; ‘Go to college. He’s right,’ I said. ‘Which college can I join with my 
marks? I am not smart like Raghav and you.’ ‘Raghav is smart, not me,’ I corrected her. ‘Why? Because of 
the mock-test? You are so stupid,’ Aarti said. ‘You are stupid.’ ‘We are both stupid, fine? Did you have 
dinner?’ She had asked me this question every night for the last five years. I wanted to stay mad at her, but 
could not. ‘I did, thanks’ ‘What thanks? Stupid. Go to bed now, sleep and don’t think about the entrance 
exams’ ‘Aarti,’ I said and paused.
‘What?’ ‘You are very nice,’ I said. I couldn’t come up with a better Hue. ‘Nice and stupid? Or nicely 
stupid?’ Aarti laughed. ‘What would I do without you?’ ‘Shut up. I am here only,’ she said. ‘We are not 
young anymore, Aarti,’ I said. ‘Okay, okay. Not that again. Go to bed, Mr Grown-up Man.’ ‘Aarti, come on. 
You always avoid ...’ ‘We’ll talk, but not now. After your entrance exams’ I kept quiet. ‘Don’t complicate 
life, Gopal. Aren’t you happy with our friendship?’ ‘Yes, I am but...’ ‘But-but what? Good night, sweet 
dreams, sleep tight.’ ‘Good night.’ ‘It’s no use now,’ I said, closing the maths textbook. Raghav had come 
to my house on the eve of the exam. He had offered a last-minute trigonometry revision, my weak spot. 
Raghav picked up the textbook. ‘You sleep, okay? Rest before the exam is a must. And take lots of 
sharpened pencils,’ he said Baba came out of the kitchen when he saw Raghav leave. ‘Stay for dinner,’ 
Baba told him. ‘Not today, Baba,’ Raghav said. ‘1 will take a proper treat once Gopal gets a rank,’ I did get 
a rank. A fucked-up rank, that is. ‘52,043,’ I read out from the screen. I had come to Raghav’s house in 
Shivpur. We had logged on to the AIEEE website. Sure, I hadn’t scored too badly. Out of ten lakh test-
takers, I had beaten nine lakh fifty thousand. However, the NITs had only thirty thousand seats. 
Sometimes, life played cruel jokes on you. I’d be one of those unfortunate cases who had done well, but 
not well enough. ‘5,820,’ Raghav said, reading from the computer monitor.
Raghav’s father had come into the room to stand behind us. ‘What’s that?’ I said. ‘My rank,’ Raghav said. 
‘Excellent!’ Raghav’s father said delightedly. Raghav smiled. He could not react more than that. ‘This 
should give you lots of choices,’ Raghav’s proud father said. ‘You can get Electronics in Delhi.’ ‘There’s NIT 
Lucknow too, right?’ Raghav said. ‘Closer home.’ ‘Forget AIEEE, let us wait for JEE’ Raghav's father said, 
his voice elated. Father and son took a while to remember my presence in the room. They saw my 
crestfallen face and fell silent. ‘I have to go home,’ I mumbled. ‘Fifty thousand should get you something, 
no?’ Raghav’s father said, fully aware it would not. He didn’t mean to hurt me, but it felt bad. Never in my 
life had I felt so small. I felt like a beggar hanging out with kings. 'I’ll see you later, Raghav,’ I said and 
scurried out of their house. I didn’t want anyone to see my tears. Raghav came running after me in the 
lane outside his house. ‘You okay?’ he asked. I swallowed hard and wiped my eyes before turning to him. 
‘I’m fine, buddy,’ I lied. ‘And congrats! You owe us a treat. But your dad is right. We will take the real party 
after JEE.’ I continued to ramble until Raghav interrupted me. ‘Will Baba be fine?’ he asked. I shrugged my 
shoulders and fought the lump in my throat. ‘Should I come with you?’ he offered. Yeah right, take a top-
ranker to meet your parent when you’ve flunked, I thought. ‘Don’t worry. He’s faced worse things in life,’ I 
said.                                             ‘Aren’t the AIEEE results due today? They are not in the papers,’ Baba said as 
soon as I entered the house. Four different newspapers lay open on the floor. ‘No, they don’t publish 
results in the newspaper anymore. Baba, what is this mess?’ I said.
I bent down to collect the papers. I did not mention that the results were available online. ‘So how do we 
find out the results? Isn’t today the date?’ he said. I kept quiet as I stacked the newspapers. I wanted to tell 
him the results won’t be out for a while. Peace for a few more days would be nice, even if temporary. I 
saw his aged face, the wrinkles around his eyes. Eyes that were extra bright today. ‘Should we go to NIT 
Lucknow?’ Baba said, happy to make the five-hour journey to find out his son was a loser. ‘Baba!’ I 
protested. ‘What?’ ‘Let’s make lunch.’ I moved to the kitchen. The antique gas stove took six tries to start. 
I placed a bowl of water on a burner to boil dal. My father stood behind me. ‘We have to get the results. 
Let’s go,’ he said. When old people get stuck on something, they don’t let go. 'Let me make the meal,’ I 
said. ‘I will call you when it is ready.' Telling your parents you’ve failed at something is harder than the 
actual failure. I cooked lunch for the next hour. I wondered if life would ever be the same again. One 
stupid exam, half a dozen mistakes in multiple-choice problems had changed my life forever. My father and 
I ate in silence, his hopeful eyes pinned on me. My hiding the news did not help anyone. I went to him after 
dinner. ‘I know the results, Baba,’ I said softly. ‘And?’ he said, eyes wide. 'My rank is 52,043.’ 'Is tli.it 
good?' I shook my head. ‘You won’t get a good branch?’ ‘I won’t get into NIT,’ I said. My father’s 
expression changed. He had the look every child dreads. The look that says, T brought you up, now see 
what you have done!’ A bullet in the head is preferable to that look. Baba got up agitatedly and started to 
circle the dining table. ‘How can you not get a good rank?’
Well, not everyone does, Baba. Nine lakh fifty thousand of us didn’t. But I did not air my thought. ‘Now 
what?’ he said. I wondered if I should suggest some options - suicide, penance in the Himalayas or a life of 
drudgery as a labourer? ‘I am sorry, Baba,’ I said. ‘I told you to study more,’ he said. Which parent doesn’t? 
He went to his room. I gathered the courage to enter his bedroom after half an hour. He had kept a 
hotwater bottle on hi.s lie.nl. ‘I could do a BSc, Baba,’ I said. ‘What good will that do, huh?'  he said, his 
voice too loud for a sick man. I'll finish my graduation. Look for a job There should be plenty of 
opportunities,' I said up words as i spoke. ‘Who gives a good job to a simple graduate?’ Baba said. Correct, 
a ‘simple’ graduate meant nothing. ‘We don’t have money for a donation college, Baba,’ I reminded him. 
He nodded. He spoke after some thought. ‘Try again?’ Baba had not made an unreasonable suggestion. 
However, he had horrible timing. The entrance exam had given me so much pain. The mere thought of 
repeating it caused physical agony. ‘Stop it, Baba,’ I screamed, ‘If you had settled on the land, we would 
have money for a private college. You didn’t, so I have to keep suffering.’ My father pressed the hot-water 
bottle harder against his forehead. He looked pained, by the headache and me. ‘Go away’ he said. ‘I am 
sorry’ I said automatically. ‘Fail exams, scream at your father. You are going in the right direction, son,’ he 
said, eyes closed. ‘I’ll do something. I won’t let you down. I will become rich one day,’ I said. ‘It is not easy 
to become rich. You have to work hard. You don’t,’ he
said. I wanted to tell him that I did work hard. You don’t get a fifty-thousand rank, however useless that 
may be, without working hard. I wanted to say I felt fucked up inside. I wished he would figure out I 
wanted to cry, and that it would be great if he hugged me. ‘Go away. Let me have some peace in my final 
days,’ he said. I went to my room and sat in silence. I had never really missed my mother all these years. 
However, on the day of the AIEEE results, I wished she was around. I kicked myself for not getting those six 
extra problems right. I kept rewinding to the day of the exam. As if my brain could go back in time, 
recreate the same scenario, and I wouldn’t make the same mistakes again. Regret - this feeling has to be 
one of the biggest manufacturing defects in humans. We keep regretting, even though there is no point to 
it. I stayed in my bed, dazed. I came to the living room at midnight. I called Aarti. ‘Hey, you okay?’ Her 
voice was calm. She knew my results. Yet she hadn’t called. She knew I’d call her when I was good and 
ready. Aarti and I were in sync. ‘We will talk on the boat,’ I said. ‘Four-thirty tomorrow morning at Assi 
Ghat,’ she said. I went back to bed after the call. I lay down but couldn’t sleep. I tossed and turned for 
ages. There would be no sleep till I sorted things out with Baba. I went to his room. He was asleep, the 
hot-water bottle still by his head. I kept the bottle aside. My father woke up. ‘I am sorry, Baba,’ I said. He 
didn’t say anything. ‘I’ll do whatever you tell me. I will try again if that’s what you want. I’ll become an 
engineer, Baba,’ I said. He placed a hand on my head as if in blessing. It acted as a tipping point for my 
emotions. I broke down. ‘I’ll work extra hard,’ I said as tears rolled down my cheeks. ‘God bless you, go to 
sleep,’ he said.
? I reached Assi Ghat at four-thirty in the morning. Phoolchand, my boatman friend, smiled as he handed 
me the oars. He had never charged me in all these years. I would take his boat for an hour, and buy him tea 
and biscuits in return. Firangs would pay five hundred bucks for the same. Sometimes I’d help him 
negotiate with foreigners in English, and he’d give me a ten per cent commission. Yes, I could make money 
like this too. Maybe not a lot, but enough to survive. If only Baba would understand this. ‘Come back by 
five-thirty,’ Phoolchand said. ‘I have a booking. Japanese tourists’ ‘I won’t take more than half an hour,’ 1 
promised. He smirked. ‘You are going with a girl. You may forget the time.’ ‘I won’t.’ ‘You have a setting 
with her?’ Phoolchand said as he untied the anchor rope. In small towns, everyone is interested in every 
male and female interaction. ‘Phoolchand bhai, I will be back in half an hour,’ I said and got into the boat. 
Phoolchand frowned at my curt reply. ‘She is a classmate from school. Have known her for eight years,’ I 
said. He smiled. His paan-stained teeth shone in the semi-darkness of dawn. ‘I’ll help you with the 
Japanese, we will rip them off together,’ I said, holding the oars. Aarti was waiting twenty metres ahead of 
the ghat pier, away from the stare of boatmen and sadhus. She stepped into the boat, one foot at a time. I 
whisked the boat away from the shore. ‘Let’s go that way,’ she said, pointing in the quieter western 
direction. On the east, the morning aarti had commenced at the crowded Dashashwamedh Ghat. 
Dashashwamedh, believed to be the place where Brahma performed ten ashwamedha yajnas (horse 
sacrifice), is the hub of all holy activities on the banks of Ganga in Varanasi. The sound of bells and chants 
faded as I rowed further away. Soon, the only sounds came from the periodic slapping of the oars on the 
water. ‘It happens,’ said Aarti. Her face had an amber hue from the morning sun. It matched her saffron 
and red dupatta.
My arms and shoulders felt tired. I stopped rowing and put the oars down. The boat stood still somewhere 
in the middle of the Ganga. Aarti stood up to come and sit beside me. Her movement shook the boat a 
little. As per ritual, she took my tired palms and pressed them. She held my chin and made me face her. ‘I’m 
scared, Aarti,’ I said in a small voice. ‘Why?’ ‘I’ll get nowhere in life,’ I said. ‘Nonsense,’ she said. ‘So 
people who don’t have a top AIEEE rank get nowhere in life?’ ‘I don’t know. I feel so ... so defeated. I let 
Baba down.’ ‘Is he okay?’ ‘He wants me to try again. He is obsessed with making me an engineer.’ ‘Do you 
want to be an engineer?’ Aarti said. ‘My dad is not in the IAS. My grandfather was not a minister. We are 
from a simple Indian family. We don’t ask these questions. We want to make a living. Engineering gives us 
that,’ I answered. ‘How old-fashioned!’ ‘Filling your stomach never goes out of fashion, Aarti’ I said. She 
smiled and placed a hand on my arm. I hugged her. As I held her, I brought my mouth close to hers. ‘What 
are you doing?’ Aarti said, pushing me away. ‘I... I just...’ ‘Don’t,’ Aarti said sternly. ‘You will spoil our 
friendship.’ ‘I really like you,’ I said. I wanted to say ‘love’, but did not have the courage. ‘I like you too,’ 
she said. ‘Then why won’t you kiss me?’ I said. ‘I don’t want to.’ She faced me squarely. ‘Don’t get me 
wrong. You have been my best friend for years. But I’ve told you earlier ...’ She went silent. ‘What?’
‘I don’t see you that way,’ she finished. I turned away from her. ‘Gopal, please understand. You are 
disturbed so I don’t want to ‘You don’t want to what, Aarti? Hurt my feelings? Well, you have.’ I checked 
the time. My watch said 4:50 a.m. I had to return the boat. I picked up the oars again. ‘Go back to your 
place,’ I said. She complied. We remained silent till we reached the ghats. Phoolchand gave us a smile, 
which evaporated fast when I glowered at him. We stepped off the boat. ‘You want to come home later 
today?’ Aarti said. ‘Don’t talk to me,’ I said. ‘You are being an idiot,’ ‘I am an idiot, don’t you know? That’s 
why I couldn’t clear the AIEEE,’ I said and walked away without looking at her. Like AIEEE, I did not make it 
in the JEE either. Raghav did, with an all-India rank of 1123. It turned him into a mini-celebrity in Varanasi. 
Local papers carried big stories the next day. Four students from Varanasi had cracked the JEE. Among 
those four, only Raghav had cleared the exam as a resident of Varanasi. The other three had appeared 
from Kota. ‘Why did they go to Kota?’ Baba mused, looking up from the newspaper. Baba had resigned 
himself to my being a loser. He did not react to my not obtaining a JEE rank at all. ‘Kota is the capital of IIT 
coaching classes. Tens of thousands go there’ I explained. Every year, the tiny western Indian town of Kota 
accounted for a thousand, or a third of the total IIT selections. ‘What?’ Baba said. ‘How is that possible?’ I 
shrugged my shoulders. I didn’t want to discuss entrance exams any more. I had secured seventynine per 
cent in class XII. I could do BSc at the Allahabad University. The 120-kilometre commute would be difficult, 
but I could move there and visit Baba on weekends. ‘Which IIT is Raghav joining?’ ‘I don’t know,’ I said. 
‘Baba, can you give me two hundred rupees. I need to buy college admission forms’
Baba looked like I had stabbed him. ‘Aren’t you repeating AIEEE?’ he said. ‘I will join the Allahabad 
University and repeat from there,’ I said. ‘How will you prepare while doing another course?’ ‘I can’t waste 
a year,’ I said and left the house.                                                      ? I had to meet Raghav. I had not even 
congratulated him. True, I did not feel any happiness about his JEE selection. I should have, but did not. 
After all, we had been friends for ten years. One should be happy for pals. However, he would be an IIT 
student and I’d be a fucking nobody. Somehow, I could not feel thrilled about that. I practised fake smiles 
while pressing his doorbell. Raghav opened the door and hugged me straight off. ‘Hey, nice to see you,’ he 
said. ‘Congrats, boss,’ I said, my lips streched into a smile and teeth sufficiently visible. ‘Now I can say I 
know a celeb.’ I came inside his house, a modest three-bedroom, BHEL-provided apartment. Newspapers 
with articles about his selection lay on the dining table. Raghav’s father sat on a sofa with visiting relatives. 
They had come to congratulate the Kashyaps. An IIT rank is a huge event - akin to climbing the Mount 
Everest or being on a space mission. Mr Kashyap smiled at me from a distance. Call it my over-imagination, 
but his greeting seemed like the one you give to people well beneath your stature. I am sure if I had had a 
rank, he would have stood up and shook hands with me. Anyway, it didn’t matter. Raghav and I went to his 
room. I sat on a chair and he on the bed. ‘So, how are you feeling?’ I said. I wanted to know how it felt to 
get one of those stupid ranks that turned you from coal to diamond in a day. ‘Unbelievable,’ Raghav said. 
‘I had thought A1EEE maybe, but JEE, wow.’ ‘Which IIT?’ I said. ‘I will join IT-BHU. I will get a good branch 
and be in Varanasi too,’ Raghav said. IT-BHU, the Institute of Technology at the Banaras Hindu University, 
was the most prestigious college in Varanasi. It conducted its admission process through the JEE. However, 
it didn’t have the same brand equity as an IIT. ‘Why BHU?’ I said. ‘I want to do journalism part-time. I have 
contacts in newspapers here,’ Raghav said.
When people are offered something on a platter, they don’t value it. Sure, Raghav had a thing for writing. 
He had published some letters to the editor and a couple of articles in some papers. However, this sounded 
insane. ‘You will give up an IIT for a hobby?’ I said. ‘It is not a hobby. Journalism is my passion.’ ‘Why are 
you doing engineering then?’ ‘Dad. Why else? Oh, I have told him I am taking BHU because I will get a 
better branch like Computer Science. Don’t tell him anything else.’ ‘Raghav, you still...’ ‘Raghav!’ Mr 
Kashyap shouted from outside. ‘My relatives, sorry. I have to go,’ Raghav said. ‘Let’s catch up later. Call 
Aarti also. I owe you guys a treat.’ He got up to leave. When people achieve something, they become self-
obsessed. ‘Want to know what I am going to do?’ I said casually. Raghav stopped. ‘Oh, sorry. Sure, tell 
me,’ he said. I don’t know if he cared, or if he felt obligated. ‘Allahabad University. I will take a second 
attempt from there,’ I said. ‘Sounds good,’ Raghav said. ‘I am sure you will crack something. At least 
AIEEE.’ When people clear JEE, they start using phrases like ‘at least AIEEE’. I smiled. ‘Baba wants me to 
drop a year to attempt again.’ 'You could do that too,’ Raghav said. His father shouted out for him again. 
‘Go, it’s okay,’ I said. ‘I’ll also leave.’ ‘See you, buddy’ Raghav patted my shoulder.                                               
? ‘No, Baba,’ I said. ‘I am not going to Kota.’ Without my knowledge, my father had spent one whole week 
researching on Kota. ‘Bansal and Resonance are the best,’ he said.
‘How do you know?’ ‘I am a retired teacher. I can find out.’ ‘Great,’ I said. ‘I am ready to send you. Tuition 
is thirty thousand a year. Living expenses around three thousand a month. How much is that for twelve 
months? Thirty plus thirty-six thousand ...’ Baba mumbled to himself. ‘Sixty-six thousand!’ i said. ‘And a 
wasted year. Baba, who are we? Kings?’ ‘I have a forty-thousand fixed deposit I haven’t told you about,’ 
Baba said. ‘I saved whatever I could in the past three years. Enough to get you started. We’ll figure out the 
rest.’ ‘So blow up whatever little money we have on tuitions? In some faraway place? Where is Kota, 
anyway?’ ‘In Rajasthan. It’s far, but there is a direct train. Takes twenty-two hours’ ‘Baba, but... why can’t 
I join college? Give me the money for that. At least I will have a degree.’ ‘What’s the point of a useless 
degree? And how will you do a repeat attempt without better coaching? You just missed a good rank 
because of a few marks. Maybe Kota will help you get those extra marks.’ I was confused. I had never 
thought of a second attempt, let alone going so far for a year. ‘You have to give it your best. Look at 
Raghav. He’s set for life,’ Baba said. ‘Look-at-Raghav’, yes, the new medicine being shoved down every 
Varanasi kid’s throat right now. ‘We can’t afford it,’ I said, collecting my thoughts. ‘Besides, who will take 
care of you here? Allahabad is nearby. I can come every week. You can visit...’ ‘I can manage. Don’t I do 
most of the housework?’ Baba said. I thought of Aarti. Sure, she had said no to me in the boat, but I knew 
how much she cared for me. Not a day went by without us talking. It was she who suggested I go to a 
college here, and I’d already found out the best course I could get with my percentage. How could I tell her 
I am going to Kota? Of course, I couldn’t give Baba this reason to stay in Varanasi. ‘I promise I will work 
harder next time,’ I said.
We finished dinner and I began to clear the table. ‘You will keep doing domestic chores here,’ Baba 
shouted suddenly. ‘You are going.’ ‘You have forty thousand. What about the rest? What about expenses 
such as travel, books, entrance exam fees?’ I said. My father showed me his shrivelled index finger. It had a 
thick gold band around it. ‘I don’t need this useless ring,’ he said. ‘We also have some of your mother’s 
jewellery.’ ‘You want to sell Mas jewellery for coaching classes?’ ‘I had kept all that for your wife, but after 
you become an engineer, you can buy them for her yourself.’ ‘What if you fall ill, Baba? Better to preserve 
all this for medical emergencies.’ ‘You join an engineering college and my age will reduce by ten years,’ 
Baba laughed, trying to soften the situation. I saw his face, one front tooth missing. His laughter meant 
everything to me. I thought about Kota. They did seem good at making students clear entrance exams. I 
thought about the downside - the money required, the uncertainty and, of course, staying away from 
Aarti. ‘Do it for your old man,’ he said. ‘I’d move with you to Kota, but it’s hard for me to travel so far. We 
have to maintain this little house too.’ ‘It’s fine, Baba. If I go, I’ll go by myself,’ I said. ‘Your mother too 
wanted you to become an engineer.’ I looked at my mother’s picture on the wall. She looked happy, 
beautiful and young. ‘Take care of your father,’ she seemed to tell me. ‘Will you go?’ Baba said. ‘If it 
makes you happy, I will.’ ‘My son!’ Baba hugged me - the first time since the AIEEE results. ‘Show us  black 
ones,’ Aarti said to the shopkeeper. She pointed to a set of twelve clothes hangers. We had come to a 
household items shop in Nadeshar Road to buy things I’d need in Kota. ‘Just because I am helping you shop 
doesn’t mean I am happy about you leaving Varanasi,’ Aarti said. ‘I won’t. Say the word and I will cancel 
my ticket.’ She placed a palm on my cheek. ‘I hate it that my best friend is leaving. However, it is the right 
thing
for you to do.’ She approved of the hangers. They cost fifty bucks a set. ‘Uncle, I am buying towels, soap 
dishes and so many other things. You better give a good discount.’ The shopkeeper grimaced, but she 
ignored him. ‘Thank you for coming. I would not have known what to buy,’ I told her. ‘Have you taken 
cooking vessels? Forgot, no?’ ‘I am not going to cook. They have a tiffin system.’ Aarti ignored me. She 
went to the utensils section and picked up a large steel bowl and held it up. ‘For emergencies,’ Aarti said. 
‘If I came to Kota with you, I’d cook for you everyday.’ Her fair hands held up the shiny vessel. The picture 
of her cooking in my kitchen flashed in my head. Why does Aarti make statements like these? What am I 
supposed to say? ‘I’ll manage fine,’ I said. The shopkeeper made the bill. Aarti looked at me. She 
hypnotised me every time. She was turning prettier every week. A small girl who had come to the shop 
with her mother came up to Aarti. ‘Do you come on TV?’ Aarti shook her head and smiled. She turned to 
the shopkeeper. ‘Uncle, twenty per cent discount.’ Aarti wasn’t too conscious of her looks. She never 
checked herself out in mirrors, never had make-up on, and even her hair often flopped all over her face. It 
made her even more attractive. ‘Should we leave?’ she said. ‘Whatever.’ ‘What happened?’ ‘At the last 
minute you say random things like “if I came to Kota’” ‘I could. I will tell dad I also want to repeat a year. 
You never know.’ She winked. I stared at her, seeking a hint of seriousness in her comment. Would that be 
possible? ‘Really?’ I said, almost believing her. ‘I’m joking, stupid. I told you. I’ve enrolled for Psychology 
honours at the Agrasen College.’ ‘I thought you ...’
‘Why are you so gullible?’ She burst into peals of laughter. ‘Gulli... what?’ I said. She pulled my cheek. ‘Oh’ I 
said and composed myself. Of course, no way she could come to Kota. I am not a gulli-whatever person. I 
understand things. Still, Aarti could defeat my logical faculties. I stopped thinking when I was with her. I 
collected the purchased items and noticed her paying the shopkeeper. ‘Wait,’ I said. ‘I will pay.’ ‘Forget it. 
Let’s go,’ she said. She tugged at my elbow and dragged me out of the shop. ‘How much?’ I said as I 
fumbled with my wallet. She took my wallet and placed it back in my shirt pocket. She placed a finger on 
my lips. Why do girls send confusing signals? She had rebuffed me on the boat the other day. Yet she 
comes to shop with me for boring clothes hangers and doesn’t let me pay. She calls me three times a day 
to check if I’ve had my meals. Does she care for me or not?                                              ? ‘You want to try the 
new Dominos at Sigra?’ she said. ‘Can we go to the ghats?’ I said. ‘Ghats?’ she said, surprised. ‘I want to 
soak in as much Varanasi as possible before I leave.’ We walked lo the steps of the Lalita Ghat, quieter 
than the busy Dashasliwametfh on our right. We sat next to each other and watched the Ganga change 
colours with the evening sun. On our left, flames flickered from the never-ending funeral pyres in the 
Manikarnika Ghat. The ghat, named after Shiva’s earring that he dropped here during a dance, is 
considered the holiest place for cremation. She held my elbow lightly. I looked around. Apart from some 
tourists and sadhus, I spotted a few locals. I shook my elbow free. ‘What?’ she said. ‘Don’t. It’s not good. 
Especially for you.’ ‘Why?’ ‘Because you are a girl.’ She smacked my elbow. ‘So what?’
‘People talk. They don’t say good things about girls who sit on the ghats holding elbows’ ‘We are just really 
good friends,’ she said. I hated that term. I wanted to talk about my place in her life, even though I did not 
want to make things unpleasant. ‘But now I am leaving,’ I said. ‘So? We will be in touch. We will call. We 
can chat on the net. There are cyber cafes in Kota, right?’ I nodded. ‘Don’t look so glum,’ she said. We 
heard the temple bells ring in the distance. The evening aarti was about to begin. ‘What is your problem?’ I 
said. ‘About what?’ she said. ‘About us. Us being more than friends’ ‘Please, Gopal, not again.’ I became 
quiet. We saw the evening aarti from a distance. A dozen priests, holding giant lamps the size of flaming 
torches, prayed in synchronised moves as singers chanted in the background. Hundreds of tourists 
gathered around the priests. No matter how many times you see it, the aarti on Varanasi ghats manages to 
mesmerise each time. Much like the Aarti next to me. She wore a peacock blue salwar-kameez and fish-
shaped silver earrings. ‘I don’t feel that way, Gopal,’ she said. ‘About me?’ About anyone. And I like what 
you and I share. Don’t you?’ ‘I do. But I am leaving now. If we had a commitment, wouldn’t it be better?’ 
‘Commitment? Gopal, we are so young!’ She laughed. She stood up. ‘Come, let’s float diyas. For your trip.’ 
Girls are the best topic switchers in the world. We walked down to the waters. She purchased a set of six lit 
diyas for five rupees. She passed one to me. She set one diya afloat. Holding my hand, she said, 'Let’s pray 
together, for success.’ ‘May you get what you want in Kota,’ she said, eyes shut. I looked at her. What I 
really want is not in Kota, I am leaving it behind in Varanasi...
                              
 Kota

It took me twenty-three hours in the hot and stuffy Dwarka Express to reach Kota. I had emailed Vineet, a 
Varanasi boy who’d spent the last year in Kota, I learnt about the coaching classes; Bansal and Resonance 
had the best reputation. However, they screened students with their own tests. If I did not get into Bansal 
or Resonance, Kota had other, less selective coaching classes that catered to losers like me. However, 
before I joined a coaching ghetto I had to find a place to live in. Vineet had told me about some paying 
guest accommodations. I hailed an auto from the railway station. ‘Gayatri Society Building,’ I said, ‘in 
Mahavir Nagar, near Bansal classes’ The auto drove down the dusty streets of Kota. It looked like any 
other small town in India, with too much traffic and pollution and too many telecom, underwear and 
coaching-class hoardings. I wondered what was so special about this place. How could it make thousands 
of students clear the most competitive exam in the world? ‘IIT or Medical?’ asked the auto driver, who had 
gray hair and matching teeth. I figured out what made Kola different. Every one was clued into the 
entrance exams. ‘IIT,’ I said. ‘Bansal is the best. But their entrance exam is scheduled for next week.’ ‘You 
know all this?’ I said, baffled by the driver’s knowledge. He laughed and turned around. ‘My whole family is 
into education. My wife runs a tiffin business. You want food delivered?’ I nodded. ‘Shankar, originally 
from Alwar,’ he said. He extended his grease-stained hand. I shook it as little as possible. ‘Gopal from 
Varanasi.’ He gave me a business card for the tiffin service. Two meals a day for a monthly cost of fifteen 
hundred bucks. ‘Let us take care of the food. You boys study, it is such a tough exam.’ ‘Which exam?’ I 
said. ‘For IIT it is JEE. Come on, Gopal bhai. We are not that uneducated.’
                                                   ? We reached the Gayatri Society compound. A rusty iron gate protected a 
crumbling block of apartments. A sweeper with a giant broom produced dust clouds in the air in an attempt 
to clean the place. I went to the small guard post at the entrance of the building. A watchman sat inside. 
‘Who do you want to meet?’ the watchman said. ‘I want to rent a room,’ I said. The watchman looked me 
over. He saw my two over-stuffed, overaged and over-repaired suitcases. One held clothes, the other 
carried the books that had failed to get me anywhere so far. My rucksack carried the stuff Aarti had bought 
me. I missed her. I wondered if I should find an STD booth and call her. ‘IIT or Medical?’ the watchman 
asked, crushing tobacco in his hand. Kota locals find it hard to place outsiders until they know what they 
are there for. ‘IIT,’ I said. I wished he would give me more attention than his nicotine fix, ‘First-timer or 
repeater?’ the watchman asked next, still without looking up. ‘Does it matter?’ I said, somewhat irritated. 
‘Yes,’ he said and popped the tobacco into his mouth. ‘If you are a first-timer, you will join a school also. 
You will be out of the house more. Repeaters only go for coaching classes. Many sleep all day. Some 
landlords don’t like that. So, tell me and I can show you the right place.’ ‘Repeater,’ I said. I don’t know 
why I looked down as I said that. I guess when you fail an entrance exam, even a tobacco-chewing 
watchman can make you feel small. ‘Oh God, another repeater,’ the watchman said. ‘Anyway, I will try. Fix 
my fee first.’ ‘What?’ I said. ‘I take half a months rent. What’s your budget?’ ‘Two thousand a month.’ 
‘That’s it?’ the watchman said. ‘Make it four thousand. I will get you a nice, shared air-conditioned room.’ 
‘I can’t afford to pay so much,’ I said. The watchman sneered, as if someone had asked for country liquor 
in a five-star bar. ‘What?’ I said, wondering if I’d be spending my first night in Kota on the streets.
‘Come,’ he beckoned. He opened the gate and kept my' suitcases in his cabin. We climbed up the steps of 
the first apartment block. ‘Will you share with other boys? Three to a room,’ the watchman said. ‘I could,’ 
I said, ‘but how will I study? I want a private one, however small.’ Studies or not, I wanted to be left alone. 
‘Okay, fifth floor,’ the watchman said. We climbed up three floors. I panted due tu the exertion. The 
extreme heat did not help. ‘Kota is hot, get used to the weather,’ the watchman said. ‘It is horrible outside. 
1 hat is why it is a good place to stay inside and study.’ We reached the fourth floor. I struggled to catch 
my breath. He couldn’t stop talking. ‘So you will study for real or you are just ...’ he paused mid-sentence. 
‘Just what?’ I said. ‘Time-pass. Many students come here because their parents push them. They know they 
won’t get in. At least the parents stop harassing them for a year,’ he said. ‘I want to get in. I will get in,’ I 
said, more to myself than him. ‘Good. But if you need stuff like beer or cigarettes, tell me. This housing 
society doesn’t allow it.’ ‘So?’ ‘When Birju is your friend, you don't have to worry. He winked at me. We 
rang the bell of the fifth-floor flat. An elderly lady opened the door. ‘Student,’ the watchman said. The lady 
let us in. Her place smelt of medicines and damp. The watchman showed me the room on rent. The lady 
had converted a storeroom into a study and bedroom. The lady, watchman and I could barely stand in the 
tiny room together. ‘It’s perfect for studying, said the watchman, who probably hadn’t studied even one 
day in his whole life. ‘Take it, it is within your budget.’ I shook my head. The room had no windows. The old 
lady seemed arrogant or deaf or both. She kept
a grumpy face throughout. I did not want to live here. Why couldn’t I study in my Varanasi? What was so 
special about this godforsaken place? I wanted to get out of Kota ASAP. I walked out of the flat. The 
watchman came running after me. ‘If you fuss so much, you won’t get anything.’ ‘I’ll go back to Varanasi 
then,’ I said. I thought about how different my life would have been if I had answered six more multiple-
choice questions. I thought of Raghav, who would, at this moment, be attending his orientation at the 
BHU campus. I thought of Aarti and our heart-to-heart conversations. I thought of Baba’s ill health and his 
determination to kick me into this dump. I fought back tears. I started to walk down the stairs. ‘Or increase 
your budget,’ the watchman said as he came up behind me. ‘I cant. I have to pay for food and the coaching 
classes,’ I said. We walked down the steps and reached the ground floor. ‘It happens the first time,’ the 
watchman said, ‘missing your mother?’ ‘She’s dead,’ I said ‘Recently?' the watchman said. Some people 
find it perfectly normal to cross examine strangers. ‘She died fourteen years ago,’ I said. I came to the 
guard post and picked up my bags. ‘Thank you, Birju’ I said. ‘Where are you going? Take a shared room,’ he 
pleaded. ‘I’ll find a cheap hotel for now. I am used to being alone. I’ll figure things out.’ Birju took the 
suitcases from me and placed them down. ‘I have a proper room,’ he said, ‘double the size of what you 
saw. It has windows, a big fan. A retired couple stays there. Within your budget...’ ‘Then why didn’t you 
show it to me earlier?’ ‘There’s a catch; ‘What?’ ‘Someone died in the house.’ ‘Who?’ I said. Big deal, I 
could take death. I’m from Varanasi, where the world comes to die.
‘The student who rented it. He didn’t get through, so he killed himself. Two years ago. It has been empty 
since.’ I did not respond. ‘Now you see why I didn’t show it to you,5 Birju said, ‘I’ll take it,’ I said. ‘Sure?’ 
‘I’ve seen dead bodies burning and floating all my life. 1 don’t care if some loser hanged himself.' The 
watchman picked up my suitcases. We went to the third floor in the next flat. A couple in their sixties 
stayed there. They kept the place immaculately clean. The spartan to-let room had a bed, table, cupboard 
and fan. ‘Fifteen hundred,’ I said to the couple. The watchman gave me a dirty look. The couple looked at 
each other. ‘I know what happened here,’ I said, ‘and it’s fine by me.’ The old gentleman nodded. ‘I am RL 
Soni, I used to work in the PWD.’ He extended his hand. I gave him a firm handshake. ‘I’m Gopal, an IIT 
repeater. I plan to get in this time,’ I said. I dumped the brochures on the bed, and took off my shoes and 
socks. I had spent the day visiting various coaching schools. At three in the afternoon, my room felt at 
ignition point. Mr Soni gently knocked on the door of my room. ‘Your lunch,’ he said and kept the tiffin on 
my study table. I nodded in gratitude. It felt too hot to exchange pleasantries. I had arranged for my meals 
and a place to stay. However, my main challenge in Kota, apart from constantly fighting off thoughts 
about Aarti, was to enrol in a good study programme. I had spent the last three days doing the rounds of 
every coaching school. I took in their tall claims about zapping any primate into an IITian. I went through 
their super-flexible (not to mention super-expensive) fee structures. Bansal, Resonance and Career Path 
seemed to be everyone’s top choices. Each of them had their own, rather difficult, entrance exams. In 
fact, Kota now had small coaching shops to coach you to get into the top coaching classes. From there, 
you would be coached to get into an engineering college. Once there, you study to become an engineer. 
Of course, most engineers want to do an MBA. Hence, the same coaching class cycle would begin again. 
This complex vortex ol tests, classes, selections and preparations is something every insignificant Indian 
student like me has to go through to have a shot at a decent life. Else, I could always take the job of Birju 
the watchman or, if I wanted it simpler, hang myself like my erstwhile room-resident Manoj Dutta.
I switched on the same fan that helped Manoj check out of the entrance exam called life. The moving 
blades re-circulated the hot air in the room. I nodded. ‘Shankar, originally from Alwar,’ he said. He 
extended his grease-stained hand. I shook it as little as possible. ‘Gopal from Varanasi.’ He gave me a 
business card for the tiffin service. Two meals a day for a monthly cost of fifteen hundred bucks. ‘Let us 
take care of the food. You boys study, it is such a tough exam.’ ‘Which exam?’ I said. ‘For IIT it is JEE. 
Come on, Gopal bhai. We are not that uneducated.’ ? We reached the Gayatri Society compound. A rusty 
iron gate protected a crumbling block of apartments. A sweeper with a giant broom produced dust clouds 
in the air in an attempt to clean the place. I went to the small guard post at the entrance of the building. A 
watchman sat inside. ‘Who do you want to meet?’ the watchman said. ‘I want to rent a room,’ I said. The 
watchman looked me over. He saw my two over-stuffed, overaged and over-repaired suitcases. One held 
clothes, the other carried the books that had failed to get me anywhere so far. My rucksack carried the 
stuff Aarti had bought me. I missed her. I wondered if I should find an STD booth and call her. ‘IIT or 
Medical?’ the watchman asked, crushing tobacco in his hand. Kota locals find it hard to place outsiders 
until they know what they are there for. ‘IIT,’ I said. I wished he would give me more attention than his 
nicotine fix, ‘First-timer or repeater?’ the watchman asked next, still without looking up. ‘Does it matter?’ I 
said, somewhat irritated. ‘Yes,’ he said and popped the tobacco into his mouth. ‘If you are a first-timer, 
you will join a school also. You will be out of the house more. Repeaters only go for coaching classes. 
Many sleep all day. Some landlords don’t like that. So, tell me and I can show you the right place.’ 
‘Repeater,’ I said. I don’t know why I looked down as I said that. I guess when you fail an entrance
exam, even a tobacco-chewing watchman can make you feel small. ‘Oh God, another repeater,’ the 
watchman said. ‘Anyway, I will try. Fix my fee first.’ ‘What?’ I said. ‘I take half a months rent. What’s your 
budget?’ ‘Two thousand a month.’ ‘That’s it?’ the watchman said. ‘Make it four thousand. I will get you a 
nice, shared air-conditioned room.’ ‘I can’t afford to pay so much,’ I said. The watchman sneered, as if 
someone had asked for country liquor in a five-star bar. ‘What?’ I said, wondering if I’d be spending my 
first night in Kota on the streets. ‘Come,’ he beckoned. He opened the gate and kept my' suitcases in his 
cabin. We climbed up the steps of the first apartment block. ‘Will you share with other boys? Three to a 
room,’ the watchman said. ‘I could,’ I said, ‘but how will I study? I want a private one, however small.’ 
Studies or not, I wanted to be left alone. ‘Okay, fifth floor,’ the watchman said. We climbed up three 
floors. I panted due tu the exertion. The extreme heat did not help. ‘Kota is hot, get used to the weather,’ 
the watchman said. ‘It is horrible outside. 1 hat is why it is a good place to stay inside and study.’ We 
reached the fourth floor. I struggled to catch my breath. He couldn’t stop talking. ‘So you will study for real 
or you are just ...’ he paused mid-sentence. ‘Just what?’ I said. ‘Time-pass. Many students come here 
because their parents push them. rIhey know they won’t get in. At least the parents stop harassing them 
for a year,’ he said. ‘I want to get in. I will get in,’ I said, more to myself than him. ‘Good. But if you need 
stuff like beer or cigarettes, tell me. This housing society doesn’t allow it.’
‘So?’ ‘When Birju is your friend, you don't have to worry. He winked at me. We rang the bell of the fifth-
floor flat. An elderly lady opened the door. ‘Student,’ the watchman said. The lady let us ia. Her place smelt 
of medicines and damp. The watchman showed me the room on rent. The lady had converted a storeroom 
into a study and bedroom. The lady, watchman and I could barely stand in the tiny room together. ‘It’s 
perfect for studying, said the watchman, who probably hadn’t studied even one day in his whole life. ‘Take 
it, it is within your budget.’ I shook my head. The room had no windows. The old lady seemed arrogant or 
deaf or both. She kept a grumpy face throughout. I did not want to live here. Why couldn’t I study in my 
Varanasi? What was so special about this godforsaken place? I wanted to get out of Kota ASAP. I walked 
out of the flat. The watchman came running after me. ‘If you fuss so much, you won’t get anything.’ ‘I’ll 
go back to Varanasi then,’ I said. I thought about how different my life would have been if I had answered 
six more multiple-choice questions. I thought of Raghav, who would, at this moment, be attending his 
orientation at the BHU campus. I thought of Aarti and our heart-to-heart conversations. I thought of 
Baba’s ill health and his determination to kick me into this dump. I fought back tears. I started to walk 
down the stairs. ‘Or increase your budget,’ the watchman said as he came up behind me. ‘I cant. I have to 
pay for food and the coaching classes,’ I said. We walked down the steps and reached the ground floor. ‘It 
happens the first time,’ the watchman said, ‘missing your mother?’ ‘She’s dead,’ I said ‘Recently?' the 
watchman said. Some people find it perfectly normal to cross examine strangers. ‘She died fourteen years 
ago,’ I said.
I came to the guard post and picked up my bags. ‘Thank you, Birju’ I said. ‘Where are you going? Take a 
shared room,’ he pleaded. ‘I’ll find a cheap hotel for now. I am used to being alone. I’ll figure things out.’ 
Birju took the suitcases from me and placed them down. ‘I have a proper room,’ he said, ‘double the size 
of what you saw. It has windows, a big fan. A retired couple stays there. Within your budget...’ ‘Then why 
didn’t you show it to me earlier?’ ‘There’s a catch; ‘What?’ ‘Someone died in the house.’ ‘Who?’ I said. Big 
deal, I could take death. I’m from Varanasi, where the world comes to die. ‘The student who rented it. He 
didn’t get through, so he killed himself. Two years ago. It has been empty since.’ I did not respond. ‘Now 
you see why I didn’t show it to you,5 Birju said, ‘I’ll take it,’ I said. ‘Sure?’ ‘I’ve seen dead bodies burning 
and floating all my life. 1 don’t care if some loser hanged himself.' The watchman picked up my suitcases. 
We went to the third floor in the next flat. A couple in their sixties stayed there. They kept the place 
immaculately clean. The spartan to-let room had a bed, table, cupboard and fan. ‘Fifteen hundred,’ I said 
to the couple. The watchman gave me a dirty look. The couple looked at each other. ‘I know what 
happened here,’ I said, ‘and it’s fine by me.’ ‘Called home?’ Mr Soni said. ‘I did,’ I said. Mr Soni asked me 
this question at least twice a day. I guess Manoj Dutta didn’t call home often enough, leading to his 
loneliness and early demise. ‘Keep them informed, okay? Nobody loves you more than your parents,’ Mr 
Soni said as he left the
room. I shut the door and removed my shirt. I hadn’t rowed in ten days. My arms felt flabby. I wanted to 
exercise, but I had to figure out the ten million brochures first. I had indeed called Baba, twice. He seemed 
fine. I told him I had started preparing for next year, even though I couldn’t bear to open any textbook. I 
didn’t care. Whichever coaching class I joined would make me slog soon. I wanted to talk to Aarti first. I’d 
called her four times but could not speak to her even once. Her mother had picked up the phone the first 
two times. She told me politely that Aarti had gone out - with friends once, and another time to submit her 
college admission form. I called twice the next day and Aarti’s mother picked up again. I hung up without 
saying anything. I did not want Aarti’s mother going ‘why is this boy calling you so many times from so 
far?’ It did not create a good impression. Aarti had mentioned she would get a cellphone soon. I wished 
she would. Everyone seemed to be getting one nowadays, at least the rich types. Aarti did not have a 
number to reach me. I would have to try again tomorrow. I picked up a green-coloured brochure. The 
cover had photographs of some of the ugliest people on earth. The pictures belonged to the IIT toppers 
from that institute. They had grins wider than models in toothpaste ads but not the same kind of teeth. 
Since my favourite hobby was wasting time, I spent the afternoon comparing the brochures. No, I didn’t 
compare the course material, success rates or the fee structures. In any case, everyone claimed to be the 
best in those areas. I compared the pictures of their successful candidates; who had the ugliest boy, who 
had the cutest girl, if at all. There was no point to this exercise, but there was no point to me being in Kota. 
I saw the Bansal brochure, the holy grail of Kota-land. Bansal students had a chip on their shoulder, even 
though they weren’t technically even in a college. The Bansalites were Kota’s cool. I had to crack their 
exam. However, I had little time to prepare for the test scheduled in three days. In fact, many of the 
coaching classes had their exams within a week. The next set of exams was a month away. I had to join 
something now. Staying idle would make me go mad faster than the earlier occupant of this room. Each 
institute asked for a thousand bucks for an application form. Whether they selected you or not, whether 
you joined or not, the fee had to be paid. I had fifty thousand rupees with me, and Baba had promised me 
more after six months. I had limited money, I could only apply selectively. I shortlisted five coaching 
institutes - Bansal, Career Path, Resonance, and two new, cheaper ones called AimllT and Careerlgnite. 
The brochure of AimllT said: ‘We believe in the democratic right of every student to be coached, hence we 
don’t conduct our own entrance tests’ It meant they weren’t in the same league as the top ones to be 
choosy. They might as well have written: ‘If you have the cash, you are welcome.’
I spent the rest of the afternoon filling the tiresome and repetitive forms. I kept myself motivated by saying 
I would call Aarti once more before dinner.                                                          ? I went out for an evening walk 
at 7:00 p.m. 'The streets were filled with nerdy students out for their daily dose of fresh air. I found an STD 
booth. ‘Hello?’ Mr Pradhan said in a firm voice. I cut the phone on reflex. The meter at the STD booth 
whirred. ‘You still have to pay,’ the shopkeeper said sourly. I nodded. I needed to speak to someone. I had 
already called Baba in the morning. I called Raghav. ‘Raghav, it’s me. Gopal. From Kota,’ I said, my last 
word soft. ‘Gopal! Oh, wow, we were just talking about you,’ Raghav said. ‘Me? Really? With who?’ I said. 
‘Aarti’s here. How are you, man? How’s Kota? We miss you.’ ‘Aarti is at your place?’ I asked, puzzled. 
‘Yeah, she wanted me to help her choose her course. She is not sure about Psychology.’ Aarti snatched the 
phone from Raghav mid-sentence. ‘Gopal! Where are you?’ ‘In Kota, of course. I called you,’ I said. I 
wanted to ask her why she had come to Raghav’s place. However, it didn’t seem the best way to start a 
conversation. ‘Why didn’t you call back? I don’t even have a number to call you,’ she said. ‘Will ask my 
landlord if I can receive calls. Tell me when you will be home. I will call you. I want to talk.’ ‘Talk now. 
What’s up?’ ‘How can I talk now?’ ‘Why?’ ‘You are with Raghav,’ I said.
‘So?’ ‘What are you doing at Raghav’s place?’ ‘Nothing. Generally.’ When girls use vague terms like 
‘generally’, it is cause for specific concern. Or maybe not. It could be my overactive mind. ‘I have to 
choose a course. Should I do Psychology or BSc Home Science?’ she said. ‘What do you want to do?’ I said. 
‘I have to finish my graduation before becoming an air hostess. That’s the only reason I am doing it. I want 
an easy course.’ ‘Oh, so your air hostess plans are not dead,' I said. ‘Well, Raghav says one should not give 
up one’s dream so easily. Maybe BSc Home Science is better, no? Sort of related to hospitality industry. Or 
should I leave Agrasen and join hotel management?’ I kept quiet. Raghav’s advising her? Who is he? A 
career counsellor? Or does he have the license to preach now because he has a fucking JEE rank? ‘Tell me 
no gopi,' Aarti said. ‘I am so confused.’ Then I heard her titter. ‘What’s so funny?’ 1 said. ‘Raghav is 
pretending to be an air hostess. He has a tray and everything,’ she said, greatly amused. ‘I’ll talk to you 
later,’ I said. ‘Okay, but tell me which course to take,’ she said, her tone finally serious. ‘Ask Raghav, he is 
the better student,’ I said. ‘C’mon, Gopi. Nonsense you talk.’ ‘Let us talk when you are alone,’ I said. ‘Call 
me this time tomorrow.’ ‘Okay, bye.’ ‘Bye,’ Aarti said. ‘I miss you,’ I said, a second too late. I only got a 
click in response.
I returned to my room where my dinner tiffin and the brochures awaited me. I imagined Aarti at Raghav’s 
place, in peals of laughter. My insides burnt. I picked up a brochure in disgust. I took a blade from my 
shaving kit, cut out the cover pictures of the IIT-selected students, and ripped them to shreds.                                                       
? Bansal classes did not look like the small tuition centres run out ol tiny apartments in Varanasi. It 
resembled an institute or a large corporate office. I stood in the gigantic lobby, wondering what to do 
next. Students and teachers strode about in a purposeful manner, as if they were going to launch satellites 
in space. Like in many other classes in Kota, the students had uniforms to eliminate social inequality. You 
had rich kids from Delhi, whose parents gave them more pocket money than my father earned in an entire 
year. On the other hand, you had losers like me from Varanasi, who had neither the cash nor the brains 
required to be here. Equality in clothes didn’t mean Bansal believed all students were equal. A class system 
existed, based on your chances of cracking the entrance exam. The person at the admissions office took 
my form. ‘High performer?' he quizzed. I wondered how anyone could respond to such a question. ‘Excuse 
me?’ ‘If you have more than 85 per cent aggregate in class XII, or if you have an AIEEE rank up to 40,000, 
you get a thirty per cent discount,’ the bespectacled gentleman at the counter explained to me. ‘I have 79 
per cent. AIEEE rank 52,043,’ I said. ‘Oh. In that case you apply for full-rate programme,’ the admission 
officer said. I didn’t realise my AIEEE rank could directly translate into money. ‘Can I get a discount?’ I said, 
wondering if one could bargain here. ‘Depends on how you do in our entrance exam,’ the officer said and 
stamped my form. He handed me a receipt-cum-admit card for the entrance exam. ‘Do I have to study for 
your entrance exam?’ I said. ‘What will you study in two days? Anyway, you don’t look like such a bright 
student going by your marks. My suggestion is to apply to other institutes,’ he replied. ‘Thanks, I will,’ I 
said. The officer looked around to ensure nobody could hear us. ‘My cousin has just started an institute. I 
can get you a fifty’- per cent discount there,’ he whispered. I kept quiet. He slipped me a visiting card: 
‘Dream IIT’.
‘Why waste money? Course material is the same. My cousin is an ex-Bansal faculty.’ I examined the card. 
‘Don’t tell anyone, okay?’ he said. I had similar experiences at other institutes. Walls covered with stamp-
sized pictures of successful JEE candidates, resembling wanted terrorists, greeted me everywhere. I also 
realised that the reputed institutes kicked up a bigger fuss about ‘repeaters’. After all, we had failed once, 
and institutes didn’t want to spoil their statistics. Top institutes claimed to send up to five hundred students 
a year to IIT. Of course, the institutes never reveal that they enrol ten thousand students, out of which only 
five hundred make it. This meant a low selection ratio of five per cent. However, the JEE had an overall 
selection ratio of less than two per cent, and Kota institutes claimed to beat it. The pre-screening of 
candidates could be the sole reason for the higher-than-average selection. However, students like me 
flocked from around the country anyway, and queued up to submit the admission forms. ’ AimllT and 
CareerIgnite had less people lining up. In fact, they gave me spot offers. The latter even offered a twenty 
per cent discount. ‘The discount is applicable only if you sign up right now, not if you come again,’ the 
aggressive salesman-cum-admissions in-charge told me. ‘But I have not decided yet,’ I protested. ‘You are 
appearing for Bansal, aren’t you?’ he said and gave me an all-knowing look. I kept quiet. ‘I am an ex-
Bansalite,’ he said. ‘Is there anyone in Kota who is not?’ I said and left the institute. Gopal! So nice to hear 
your voice,’ Aarti said. She recognised me In a second. It felt good. ‘Go to hell, you don’t care,’ I said. 
‘Huh? How stupid. I do care. Firstly, do you have a number I can call?’ ‘Yes,’ I said and gave her my 
landlord’s number, 'But don't call a lot He said no more than twice a week.’ ‘So what? I will be the only one 
calling you, no?’ Aaiti said ‘Yeah. Anyway, how’s life? I hate it here.’ ‘Is it that bad? Have you started 
studying?’ she asked. ‘No, I can’t. It is hard to pick up the same books again. Maybe I will get motivated 
after I join a
coaching class’ ‘I should have been there, I would have motivated you.’ She laughed ‘Don’t make such 
jokes.’ ‘You will be fine, Gopi. One more attempt. If you get through, your career will be made.’ ‘I miss 
you,’ I said, less interested in useless things like my career. ‘Oh’ she said, somewhat surprised by my 
shifting gears. ‘I miss you too.’ ‘I have no one, Aarti,’ I said. ‘Don’t say that. Baba is there. Raghav, me ... 
We talk a lot about you' Her voice trailed off. ‘Why don’t we become a couple? ‘Don’t. Please don't start  
that again . we have discussed it enough,' she said. 'Why not? You say you miss me. you care for. Then?' ‘I 
care for you a lot. But not in that way. Anyway, we have to focus on our respective careers. You are there, 
I am here.’ ‘If I had a girlfriend, at least I could talk to her. I feel so lonely, Aarti,’ I said. ‘Aww Gopal, you 
are homesick. Talk to me whenever you want. Or we can chat.’ ‘On the Internet?’ I had seen some cyber 
cafes around my house. ‘Yeah, make a Gmail ID. Mine is flyingaarti@gmail.com. Invite me.’ ‘Flying Aarti.’ I 
laughed. ‘Shut up.’ I laughed harder. ‘At least it cheered you up,’ she said. ‘Think about my proposal,’ I 
said. ‘There is no proposal. And now don’t waste your money on calls. We can chat in the evenings. I’ll tell 
you about my life, and you about yours. Okay?’ ‘Okay. Hey, listen. Should I join a reputed but expensive 
institute or the upcoming but cheaper ones?’
‘The best you can get, always,’ Aarti said promptly. ‘And now, bye. They are calling me for dinner.’                                                  
? One week in Kota, and I had a few decisions made for me. One, I didn’t clear the Bansal exam. I could 
join their separate correspondence programme, which kind of defeated the purpose of being in Kota. 
Resonance hiked its fees at the last minute. It became unaffordable for me, so I didn’t even write their 
entrance exam. I made it to the waitlist of the Career Path programme. ‘Your chances are good. Many will 
join Bansal and Resonance, anyway,’ the Career Path guy said. Even the Career Path waitlist had value. 
AimllT and CareerIgnite offered me a thirty per cent discount. ‘You have calibre,’ the AimllT person told 
me. ‘You have cleared Career Path, which shows your potential. Now study with us at a much cheaper 
price and clear the exam.’ ‘You will be lost amongst the thousands at Career Path. At Ignite, you will be 
special,’ said the exBansalite running down another ex-Bansalites institute. However, five days later Career 
Path told me I had made it, I handed the accountant at Career Path a twenty-thousand-rupee draft with 
trembling hands. ‘This is the best investment you will make in your life,’ the accountant said. I picked up 
the items required for the first term - course material, ID card, timetable, circulars and various worksheets 
required in the next three months. I also collected three sets of the Career Path uniform. Wearing it made 
me look like a budget hotel receptionist. I walked out of the institute with the uniform in my hands. 
‘Congratulations!’ A man in a black coat stopped me. ‘Hello’ I said, not sure what else to say. ‘I am Sanjeev 
sir. They call me Mr Pulley here. I teach physics’ I shook his hand. Apparently, nobody could solve pulley 
problems in Kota quite like Sanjeev sir. I soon realised there were subject experts across institutes in Kota. 
Career Path had its own wizards. Mr Verma, who taught maths, had the moniker of Trignometry-swamy. 
Mr Jadeja taught chemistry. Students affectionately addressed him as Balance-ji. He had a unique method 
of balancing chemical equations. According to rumours, he had tried to patent it. 'I am Gopal, from 
Varanasi.’
AIEEE programme?’ Mr Pulley said. ‘JEE also, sir.’ ‘Good. High potential?’ He referred to Career Path’s 
internal classification of students. ‘No, sir,’ I said and trained my gaze down. Once you get low marks, you 
learn to lower your eyes rather quickly. It’s okay. Many non-high potential students make it. It all depends 
on hard work.’ ‘I’ll do my best, sir,’ I said.


13
Weeks passed, and the day of the results came closer. Baba seemed even more anxious than me. One 
night when I went to give him his medicines, he asked, ‘When are the results?’ 'Next week,’ I said. ‘IIT?’ ‘A 
week after that,’ I said. ‘If IIT happens it will be amazing, no?’ Baba said, his eyes bright. I covered him with 
a blanket. ‘Baba, did the doctor say you need an operation?’ ‘Doctors want more business these days, 
what else?’ he said. ‘Should we ask Ghanshyam taya-ji to give us whatever he wants for the land?’ I said. 
‘No use. He won’t listen. Anyway, what will I do with an operation at this age? ‘You never listen, Baba.’ I 
shook my head and switched off the light. ‘It isn’t the end of the world, Gopal. It isn’t.’ She reached out for 
my hand. ‘Say something.’ Aarti had invited me home on the day of the AIEEE results. She had an Internet 
connection and, despite my insisting otherwise, didn’t want me to see the results all on my own. I 
remember everything about that moment. The red and black embroidered tablecloth on the computer 
table, the noisy fan above, the various government trophies that belonged to her father, the black colour 
of the laptop, and the screen that showed my rank. ‘44,342,’ it said irrevocably next to my roll number. 
After one whole year of cramming courses that I hated, staying in a dusty city all alone, and putting my 
father irretrievably in debt, I had only reconfirmed -1 am a failure. I didn’t react. I didn’t cry, I didn’t feel 
anger, fear, frustration, anything. I remember Aarti hovering around, talking to me. However, I couldn’t 
really comprehend her words. 1 stood up like a zombie.
‘Are you okay?’ Aarti shook me. She, me, the PC, the world, everything seemed to be in slow motion. 
‘What about JEE?’ she was saying. ‘Will be worse. My paper did not go well.’ She fell silent. What could she 
have said, anyway? ‘I have to go,’ I said. ‘Where will you go?’ she said, asking me the most important 
question. Yes, where could I go? Home? And tell Baba he had wasted all his borrowed money on me. ‘I’ll 
come home with you. I can talk to Baba.’ I shook my head. ‘Are you sure?’ she said. I didn’t respond. I 
couldn’t. I hurried out of her house.                                                      ? ‘Where had you gone?’ Baba said as he 
opened the door. I went straight to my room. Baba followed me. ‘You don’t want to see your AIEEE 
result?’ he said. I kept quiet. ‘You said it comes out today.’ I didn’t respond. ‘Why aren’t you speaking?’ I 
looked into Babas anxious eyes. ‘I have bad news,’ I said. Baba spoke in a hushed voice. ‘What?’ ‘The 
worst has happened.’ ‘What?’ I shrugged my shoulders.
‘When are the AIEEE results out?’ ‘They are out,’ I said and walked into the living room. ‘And?’ Baba 
followed me and stood right in front of me. I turned my gaze down. Baba waited for a few seconds. Slap! I 
felt my right cheek sting. For his age and strength, my father could strike quite a blow. He had hit me for 
the first time in more than ten years. I deserved it. ‘How?’ Baba said. ‘You did nothing in Kota, right? 
Nothing.’ Tears filled my eyes and my ears buzzed. I wanted to tell him that I spent nights doing 
assignments, sat through classes all day, improved my percentile. I had had a decent chance to make it. A 
few marks are all it takes to fall behind ten thousand ranks. I didn’t say anything. I cried like a child, as if my 
remorse would make him feel better. ‘How do we return the money?’ Baba said, turning to practical 
matters faster than I thought. I had improved my rank, I wanted to tell him. The teachers at Career Path 
had told me I had potential. Yes, I did get distracted for a little while, and maybe that was why I hadn’t 
made it. Anyway, not everyone in Kota had made it. Most students of Career Path had not made it. In fact, 
Vineet, the boy from Varanasi who went before me to Kota, hadn’t made it either. But all I showed Baba 
was my sullen face. ‘What are you thinking? Do you have any shame?’ he said and went into a coughing fit. 
His body shook, he found it hard to balance. ‘Sit down, Baba,’ I said as I moved forward to hold him. His 
body felt warm. ‘Don’t come near me.’ He pushed me away. ‘You have fever,’ I said. ‘Guess who gave it?’ 
he said. I didn’t know what to say or do. I didn’t even find myself worthy enough to fetch his medicines 
from the other room. I had to let him be. When you screw up someone’s life, the least you can do is leave 
the person alone. ‘I have gone through it all. You must be so fucked,’ Vineet said to me. We sat on the 
steps of Assi Ghat, close to the pier. I had arranged a secret meeting with Vineet. I did not know him too 
well. I had only exchanged some emails with him before I left for Kota. But he seemed an ideal companion 
right now. Yes, Aarti kept in touch, asking me about my well-being and
even going on boat rides with me. Yet, I had nothing to say to her. I thought about jumping into the Ganga 
and ending my life. Raghav was someone I avoided automatically now. I did not want reassurance from an 
IT-BHU guy, especially someone who did not even seem to care about his degree. Vineet, an ordinary guy 
like me, was someone I felt comfortable with. He had joined a private engineering college. ‘So I can tell 
people I am doing BTech,’ Vineet said and laughed. ‘Just avoid the college name. Anyway, it is unknown to 
most people.’ I collected a few pebbles from the ghat steps and sent them skipping on the holy river. ‘You 
will be fine, dude,’ Vineet said. ‘Never completely fine, but at least better than right now.’ ‘How did you 
choose among the private colleges?’ I said. There were dozens of them, with new ones opening every 
week. ‘I went to a career fair. I asked around. RSTC seemed slightly better than others. I don’t think there’s 
much difference.’ ‘What’s RSTC?’ I said. ‘Riddhi Siddhi Technical College. The owners have a sari business 
with the same name.’ ‘Oh,’ I said, trying to make a connection between saris and education. ‘Quite a 
backward name, no? So we say RSTC, sounds cooler.’ Vineet grinned. ‘Do you get a job afterwards?’ ‘If 
you are lucky. Sixty per cent placements. Not bad.’ ‘Forty per cent students don’t get placed?’ I said, 
shocked. This could be worse than Kota, to finish your degree and get nothing at the end of it. ‘The stats 
are improving every year. Plus, you can manage some job. There are call centres, credit card sales. Be 
open-minded and things work out.’ ‘Finish engineering and join a call centre?’ ‘Dude, don’t be so shocked. 
We, like millions of other students, are the losers in the Great Indian Education Race. Be happy with 
whatever you get. Of course, if your parents are rich, do an MBA after BTech. Another shot at a job.’ ‘And 
if not?’ I said. Vineet said nothing. Exasperated, I threw all the pebbles into the Ganga. Like low-ranked 
students, the stones sank and disappeared without a trace.
‘Hey, don’t be mad at me. I didn’t make the system.’ Vineet patted my shoulder. ‘The longer you sit idle, 
the worse you will feel. The dream is over. Join a college, any college, at least you will be with other 
students’ ‘Other losers,’ I said. ‘Don’t look down upon your own kind,’ Vineet said. He had a point. ‘I am 
sorry,’ I said. ‘How much does your BTech cost?’ ‘One lakh a year for four years, including hostel.’ ‘Fuck,’ I 
said. ‘That’s many years of salary a job would pay, if there is a job at the end of it.’ ‘I know. But your 
parents pay the fee. And they get to brag to everyone their son is becoming an engineer. You are free for 
the next four years. Think about it, not a bad trade.’ ‘We have no money,’ I said flatly. Vineet stood up. 
‘That, my friend, is going to be an issue.’ ‘Leaving?’ I said. ‘Yeah, campus is twenty kilometres out of 
Varanasi. Cheer up. You have seen life at its most fuckedup stage. It only gets better from here.’ I stood up 
and brushed the dust off my trousers. I dreaded going home. Baba had not spoken to me for three days. 
We walked through the narrow Vishwanath Gali to reach the Gadholia main road. ‘I have gone through it 
all. You must be so fucked,’ Vineet said to me. We sat on the steps of Assi Ghat, close to the pier. I had 
arranged a secret meeting with Vineet. I did not know him too well. I had only exchanged some emails 
with him before I left for Kota. But he seemed an ideal companion right now. Yes, Aarti kept in touch, 
asking me about my well-being and even going on boat rides with me. Yet, I had nothing to say to her. I 
thought about jumping into the Ganga and ending my life. Raghav was someone I avoided automatically 
now. I did not want reassurance from an IT-BHU guy, especially someone who did not even seem to care 
about his degree. Vineet, an ordinary guy like me, was someone I felt comfortable with. He had joined a 
private engineering college. ‘So I can tell people I am doing BTech,’ Vineet said and laughed. ‘Just avoid 
the college name. Anyway, it is unknown to most people.’ I collected a few pebbles from the ghat steps 
and sent them skipping on the holy river. ‘You will be fine, dude,’ Vineet said. ‘Never completely fine, but 
at least better than right now.’
‘How did you choose among the private colleges?’ I said. There were dozens of them, with new ones 
opening every week. ‘I went to a career fair. I asked around. RSTC seemed slightly better than others. I 
don’t think there’s much difference.’ ‘What’s RSTC?’ I said. ‘Riddhi Siddhi Technical College. The owners 
have a sari business with the same name.’ ‘Oh,’ I said, trying to make a connection between saris and 
education. ‘Quite a backward name, no? So we say RSTC, sounds cooler.’ Vineet grinned. ‘Do you get a job 
afterwards?’ ‘If you are lucky. Sixty per cent placements. Not bad.’ ‘Forty per cent students don’t get 
placed?’ I said, shocked. This could be worse than Kota, to finish your degree and get nothing at the end of 
it. ‘The stats are improving every year. Plus, you can manage some job. There are call centres, credit card 
sales. Be open-minded and things work out.’ ‘Finish engineering and join a call centre?’ ‘Dude, don’t be so 
shocked. We, like millions of other students, are the losers in the Great Indian Education Race. Be happy 
with whatever you get. Of course, if your parents are rich, do an MBA after BTech. Another shot at a job.’ 
‘And if not?’ I said. Vineet said nothing. Exasperated, I threw all the pebbles into the Ganga. Like low-
ranked students, the stones sank and disappeared without a trace. ‘Hey, don’t be mad at me. I didn’t make 
the system.’ Vineet patted my shoulder. ‘The longer you sit idle, the worse you will feel. The dream is over. 
Join a college, any college, at least you will be with other students’ ‘Other losers,’ I said. ‘Don’t look down 
upon your own kind,’ Vineet said. He had a point. ‘I am sorry,’ I said. ‘How much does your BTech cost?’ 
‘One lakh a year for four years, including hostel.’ ‘Fuck,’ I said. ‘That’s many years of salary a job would 
pay, if there is a job at the end of it.’
‘I know. But your parents pay the fee. And they get to brag to everyone their son is becoming an engineer. 
You are free for the next four years. Think about it, not a bad trade.’ ‘We have no money,’ I said flatly. 
Vineet stood up. ‘That, my friend, is going to be an issue.’ ‘Leaving?’ I said. ‘Yeah, campus is twenty 
kilometres out of Varanasi. Cheer up. You have seen life at its most fuckedup stage. It only gets better 
from here.’ I stood up and brushed the dust off my trousers. I dreaded going home. Baba had not spoken 
to me for three days. We walked through the narrow Vishwanath Gali to reach the Gadholia main road. 
‘There’s a career fair at Dr Sampooranand Sports Stadium in two weeks,’ Vineet said. ‘Go, maybe you will 
find cheaper colleges’ ‘There is no money. We are neck-deep in debt,’ I said. ‘Well, no harm in paying a 
visit. You can get a discount, especially from the new ones, if you have a decent AIEEE rank.’                                                       
? I walked back home. The one-hour walk in the fresh air made me feel better temporarily. I should not 
talk to Baba about expensive private colleges, I thought. Maybe I should talk to him about me making 
money in a job rather than spending more. First, I would have to end his sulking though. I went to his room. 
He was lying in bed. ‘I want to get a job, Baba. Let me make some money before I decide about college.’ 
He didn’t say a word. I continued, ‘I understand you are upset. It is justified. There is a Cafe Coffee Day 
opening in Sigra. It is a high-class coffee chain. They want staff. Class XH-pass can apply.’ I only heard the 
slow whirr of the fan in response. ‘I’ve applied. I won’t be working in a coffee shop forever. But they pay 
five thousand a month. Not bad, right?’ Baba kept quiet. ‘If you remain quiet, I will assume you are okay 
with it.’
Baba continued to mope silently despite my provocative comment. I wanted him to scold, yell, anything, 
and end this silence. I leaned over him. ‘Baba, don’t punish me like this,’ I said. I held his arm to shake him. 
It felt limp and cold. ‘Baba?’ I said again. His body felt stiff. ‘Baba?’ I said again. It finally dawned on me: I 
had become an orphan. Ease of cremation is one solid advantage of being in Varanasi. The death industry 
drives the city. The electric crematorium at Harishchandra Ghat and the original, and still revered, 
Manikarnika Ghat burn nearly forty-five thousand bodies a year, or more than a hundred corpses a day. 
Only little children and people bitten by cobras are not cremated; their bodies are often dumped straight 
into the river. ‘Kasyam maranam mukti’, goes the Sanskrit saying, which means dying in Kashi leads to 
liberation. Hindus believe that if they die here, there is an automatic upgrade to heaven, no matter what 
the sin committed on earth. It is amazing how god provides this wild-card entry at death, which in turn 
allows my city to earn a living. Specialist one-stop shops provide you everything from firewood to priests 
and urns to ensure that the dead person departs with dignity. Touts on Manikarnika Ghat lure foreigners to 
come watch the funeral pyres and take pictures for a fee, thereby creating an additional source of 
revenue. Varanasi is probably the only city on earth where Death is a tourist attraction. But for all my city’s 
expertise in death, I had personally never dealt with a dead body in my entire life, let alone that of my 
father. I did not know how to react to Baba's still body I did not, or rather could not, cry. 1 don’t know 
why. Perhaps because I was too stunned, and emotionally drained out. Perhaps I had few emotions left 
after mourning my second entrance-exam disaster. Perhaps I had too much work related to the funeral. Or 
perhaps it was because I thought I had killed him. I had to organise a cremation, then a couple of pujas. I 
didn’t know who to invite. My father had very few friends. I called some of his old students who had kept 
in touch. I informed Dubey uncle, our lawyer, more for practical reasons than anything else. The lawyer 
told Ghanshyam taya-ji. My uncle had sucked my father’s blood all his life. However, his family now 
offered unlimited sympathy. I found his wife, Neeta tayiji, at my doorstep. She saw me, extended her arms 
and broke down. ‘Its okay, tayi-ji,’ I said, extracting myself from the bosom hug. 'You need not have 
come.’ ‘What are you saying? Husbands younger brother is like a son,’ she said. Of course, she did not 
mention the land she stole from her ‘son’. ‘When is the puja?’ she asked me. ‘I have no idea,’ I said. ‘I have 
to get the cremation done first.’ ‘Who is doing that?’ she said.
I shrugged my shoulders. ‘Do you have the money to do a cremation at Manikarnika?’ she said. I shook my 
head. ‘The electric one at Harishchandra Ghat is cheaper,’ I said. ‘What electric? It is broken most of the 
time, anyway. We have to do a proper one. What are we here for?’ Soon, Ghanshyam taya-ji arrived with 
the rest of his brood. He had two sons and two daughters, all dressed in rich clothes. I didn’t look like their 
relative at all. After my uncle arrived, they took over the cremation. They called more kith and kin. They 
arranged for a priest, who offered a ten-thousandrupee package for the cremation. My uncle bargained 
him down to seven. It felt macabre to bargain for a funeral, but someone had to do it. My uncle paid the 
priest in crisp five-hundred-rupee notes. Twenty-four hours later I lit my father’s firewood-covered body at 
Manikarnika Ghat. Even though he had died, I felt the fire must hurt him. I remembered how he would 
dress me up for school when I was a child, comb my hair ... Smoke rose from the pyre and tears finally 
welled up in my eyes. I began to sob. Aarti and Raghav had come to the funeral. They stood with me, 
condoling in silence. Half an hour later most of the relatives had left. I watched as the flames ate up the 
wood. I felt a tap on my shoulder. I turned around. Two muscular men with paan-stained lips stood behind 
me. One of them had a thick moustache curved upwards. ‘Yes?’ I said. The moustached man pointed his 
finger at the pyre. ‘Are you his son?’ ‘I am.’ ‘Come aside,’ he said. ‘Why?’ I said. ‘He owed us two lakhs.’                                                          
? ‘Ghanshyam taya-ji wants to offer three lakhs?’ I said to Dubey uncle, shocked. He flipped through the 
document he had prepared for me. ‘You sign here, you get three lakhs. Loan sharks are after you. They are 
dangerous. I am trying to help you.’ I examined the document. I didn’t really understand it. ‘Three lakhs is 
too low. They offered ten lakhs
ages ago,’ I said. ‘That’s right, ages ago. When your father didn’t take it. Now they know you cant do 
anything. And you need the money.’ I kept quiet. Dubey uncle stood up. I wondered whose side my lawyer 
represented anyway. ‘I realise it isn’t an easy time for you. Think about it,’ he said.                                                                     
? I attended the career fair held in a giant tent put up in the Dr Sampooranand Sports Stadium. Vineet had 
urged me to go. ‘Meet my friend Sunil there. He is the event manager of the fair and knows all the 
participants’ I entered the main tent. Hundreds of stalls made it resemble a trade expo. Private colleges 
around the country were trying to woo the students of Varanasi. Members of managing bodies of colleges 
stood with smiling faces. Banners inside the stalls displayed campus pictures like real estate projects. In 
cases where parts of the college building were under construction, the pictures were an artists rendition. 
‘Once complete, this will be the best campus in Uttar Pradesh,’ I heard one stall-owner tell a set of anxious 
parents. He skipped the part about how during construction students would have to study in makeshift 
classrooms surrounded by concrete mixers. Loud posters proclaimed college names along with emblems. 
Names varied, but were often inspired by gods or grandfathers of rich promoters. Select faculty and 
students from each college greeted us with glossy brochures of their institute in these stalls. Everyone 
wore suits and grinned like a well-trained flight crew. Hundreds of loser students like me moved restlessly 
from one stall to the next. Seventy per cent of the stalls comprised of engineering colleges. Medical, hotel 
management, aviation academies and a few other courses like BBA made up the rest. I reached the Sri 
Ganesh Vinayak College, or SGVC, stall at noon -the designated place and time to meet Sunil. I picked up 
the SGVC brochure, with its smiling students on the cover. The boys seemed happier and the girls prettier 
than the JEE toppers in the Kota brochures. The back cover of the brochure carried praise for the facilities 
and faculty of the institute, enough to make an IIT director blush. Inside the booklet I found a list of the 
programmes offered. From computer science to metallurgy, SGVC offered every engineering course. I read 
through the entire brochure. I read the vision and mission statements of the founders. I read the college’s 
philosophy on education, and how they were different. Other career fair veterans grinned
as they walked past me. I seemed to be the only person actually reading the document. Sunil found me at 
the stall for the Sri Ganesh Vinayak College, deep in study. ‘Gopal?’ he said tentatively. ‘Huh?’ I turned 
around. ‘Sunil?’ Sunil gave me a firm handshake. Stubble and sunglasses covered most of his face. He wore 
a purple shirt and tight black jeans with a giant silver buckle. ‘What the hell are you doing?’ he asked 
straight off. ‘Reading the brochure,’ I said. ‘Are you stupid? Go to the fees and placements page. See the 
average salary, check the fee. If two years’ income pays the cost, shortlist it, else move on.’ ‘What about 
teaching methods? Learning ...’ ‘f'uck learning,’ Sunil said and snatched the brochure from my hand. 1 
found his mannerisms and language rather rough. He borrowed a calculator from one of the students at 
the stall. ‘See, tuition fifty thousand, hostel thirty thousand, let’s say twenty thousand more for the useless 
things they will make you buy. So you pay a lakh a year for four years. Average placement is one and a half 
lakhs. Fuck it. Let’s go.’ ‘But...’ I was still doing the calculations. ‘Move on. There are a hundred stalls 
here.’ We went to the next stall. The red and white banner said ‘Shri Chintumal Group of Institutes, NH2, 
Allahabad’. A small map showed the college location, thirty kilometres from Allahabad city. ‘I cant go to a 
college called Chintumal,’ I said. ‘Shut up. You never have to say your college’s name, anyway.’ Sunil 
picked up a brochure. Within seconds he found the relevant page. ‘Okay, this is seventy thousand a year. 
Final placement one lakh forty thousand. See, this makes more sense.’ A fat man in his forties came to us. 
‘Our placement will be even better this year,’ he said. ‘I am Jyoti Verma, dean of students’ I had never 
expected a dean to sell the college to me. He extended his hand. Sunil shook it purposefully. ‘Yes, your fees 
are also lower than theirs,’ I said and pointed to the Sri Ganesh stall.
‘Their placement numbers are fake. Ours are real, ask any of our students,’ Jyoti said. He pointed to his 
students, three boys and two girls, who had worn suits for the first time in their life. They smiled timidly. I 
browsed through the campus pictures in the Chintumal stall. A man from the Sri Ganesh stall came to me. 
He tapped my shoulder. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘Mahesh Verma from Sri Ganesh. Did Chintumal say anything negative 
about us?’ I looked at him. Mahesh, in his forties and fat, looked a lot like Jyoti Verma. ‘Did they?’ Mahesh 
said again. I shook my head. ‘You are considering Chintumal?’ he said. I nodded. ‘Why not Sri Ganesh?’ ‘It’s 
expensive,’ I said. ‘What’s your budget? Maybe we can help you,’ he said. ‘What?’ I said. I couldn’t believe 
one could bargain down college fees. ‘Tell me your budget. I will give you a ten per cent discount if you 
sign up right now.’ I turned to Sunil, unsure of what to say or do next. Sunil took charge of the situation. 
‘We want thirty per cent off. Chintumal is that much cheaper,’ Sunil said. ‘They don’t even have a building,’ 
Mahesh said. ‘How do you know?’ I said. ‘He’s my brother. He broke off and started his own college. But it 
has got bad reports,’ Mahesh said. Jyoti kept an eye on us from a distance. Yes, the brothers did resemble 
each other. ‘We don’t care. Tell us your maximum discount,’ Sunil said.
‘Come to my stall,’ Mahesh signalled us to follow him. ‘Stop,’ Jyoti barred our way. ‘What?’ I said. ‘Why 
are you going to Sri Ganesh?’ ‘He is giving me a discount,’ I said. ‘Did you ask me tor a discount? Did I say 
no?’ Jyoti said, his expression serious. I had never seen a businessman-cum-dean before. ‘Mahesh bhai, 
please leave my stall,’ Jyoti said in a threatening tone. ‘He’s my student. We have spoken,’ Mahesh bhai 
said and held my wrist. ‘Come, son, what’s your name?’ ‘Gopal,’ I said as Jyoti grabbed my other wrist. 
‘But please stop pulling me.’ The brothers ignored my reqest. ‘I will give you the best discount. Don’t go to 
Sri Ganesh and ruin your life. They don’t even have labs. Those pictures in the brochure are of another 
college,’ Jyoti said. ‘Sir, I don’t even know ...’ I said and looked at Sunil. He seemed as baffled as me. ‘Shut 
up, Jyoti!’ a hitherto soft-spoken Mahesh screamed. ‘Don’t shout at me in my own stall. Get out,’ Jyoti 
said. Mahesh gave all of us a dirty look. In one swift move he ripped off the Chintumal banner. Jyoti’s face 
went as red as his college emblem. He went to the Sri Ganesh stall and threw the box of brochures down. I 
tried to run out of the stall. Jyoti held me by my collar. ‘Wait, I will give you a seat for fifty thousand a 
year.’ ‘Let... me ... go,’ I panted. Mahesh returned with three people who resembled Bollywood thugs. 
Apparently, they were faculty. They started to rip out all the hoardings of the Chintumal stall. Jyoti ordered 
his own security men to fight them. As I tried to escape, one of Sri Ganesh’s goons pushed me. I fell 
facedown and landed on a wooden table covered in a white sheet. It had a protruding nail that cut my 
cheek. Blood covered one side of
my face. Sweat drops appeared on my forehead. I had finally given my blood and sweat to studies. He 
pointed to his students, three boys and two girls, who had worn suits for the first time in their life. They 
smiled timidly. I browsed through the campus pictures in the Chintumal stall. A man from the Sri Ganesh 
stall came to me. He tapped my shoulder. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘Mahesh Verma from Sri Ganesh. Did Chintumal say 
anything negative about us?’ I looked at him. Mahesh, in his forties and fat, looked a lot like Jyoti Verma. 
‘Did they?’ Mahesh said again. I shook my head. ‘You are considering Chintumal?’ he said. I nodded. ‘Why 
not Sri Ganesh?’ ‘It’s expensive,’ I said. ‘What’s your budget? Maybe we can help you,’ he said. ‘What?’ I 
said. I couldn’t believe one could bargain down college fees. ‘Tell me your budget. I will give you a ten per 
cent discount if you sign up right now.’ I turned to Sunil, unsure of what to say or do next. Sunil took 
charge of the situation. ‘We want thirty per cent off. Chintumal is that much cheaper,’ Sunil said. ‘They 
don’t even have a building,’ Mahesh said. ‘How do you know?’ I said. ‘He’s my brother. He broke off and 
started his own college. But it has got bad reports,’ Mahesh said. Jyoti kept an eye on us from a distance. 
Yes, the brothers did resemble each other. ‘We don’t care. Tell us your maximum discount,’ Sunil said.
‘Come to my stall,’ Mahesh signalled us to follow him. ‘Stop,’ Jyoti barred our way. ‘What?’ I said. ‘Why 
are you goiii}.’ l<> Sri Ganesh?’ ‘He is giving me a discount,’ I said. ‘Did you ask me tor a discount? Did I say 
no?’ Jyoti said, his expression serious. I had never seen a businessman-cum-dean before. ‘Mahesh bhai, 
please leave my stall,’ Jyoti said in a threatening tone. ‘He’s my student. We have spoken,’ Mahesh bhai 
said and held my wrist. ‘Come, son, what’s your name?’ ‘Gopal,’ I said as Jyoti grabbed my other wrist. 
‘But please stop pulling me.’ The brothers ignored my reqest. ‘I will give you the best discount. Don’t go to 
Sri Ganesh and ruin your life. They don’t even have labs. Ihose pictures in the brochure are of another 
college,’ Jyoti said. ‘Sir, I don’t even know ...’ I said and looked at Sunil. He seemed as baffled as me. ‘Shut 
up, Jyoti!’ a hitherto soft-spoken Mahesh screamed. ‘Don’t shout at me in my own stall. Get out,’ Jyoti 
said. Mahesh gave all of us a dirty look. In one swift move he ripped off the Chintumal banner. Jyoti’s face 
went as red as his college emblem. He went to the Sri Ganesh stall and threw the box of brochures down. I 
tried to run out of the stall. Jyoti held me by my collar. ‘Wait, I will give you a seat for fifty thousand a 
year.’ ‘Let... me ... go,’ I panted. Mahesh returned with three people who resembled Bollywood thugs. 
Apparently, they were faculty. They started to rip out all the hoardings of the Chintumal stall. Jyoti ordered 
his own security men to fight them. As I tried to escape, one of Sri Ganesh’s goons pushed me. I fell 
facedown and landed on a wooden table covered in a white sheet. It had a protruding nail that cut my 
cheek. Blood covered one side of
my face. Sweat drops appeared on my forehead. I had finally given my blood and sweat to studies. Sunil 
helped me up. I saw the blood on the white sheet and felt nauseous. A crowd had gathered around us. I did 
not say anything and ran out. I left the stadium and continued to sprint down the main road for two 
hundred metres. I stopped to catch my breath and heard footsteps as Sunil jogged towards me. Both of us 
held our sides and panted. ‘Fuck,’ Sunil said. ‘Lucky escape.’ We went to a chemist’s where I applied some 
dressing on my cheek. ‘Come, I will take you to CCD. It opened last week,’ Sunil said.                                                             
? We walked to Cafe Coffee Day at IP Mall, Sigra. Sunil bought us two cold coffees with a crisp new 
hundred-rupee note. I could live on that cash for a week. ‘What was that? They own a college?’ I said. ‘It is 
the Verma family from Allahabad. They are into country liquor. Now they have opened a college.’ ‘Why?’ I 
said. ‘Money. There’s huge money in private colleges. Plus, it enhances their name in society. Now they 
are noble people in education, not liquor barons.’ ‘They behaved like goons’ ‘They are goons. Brothers had 
a fight, college split and now they try to bring each other down.’ ‘I can’t do this,’ I said. ‘Don’t worry, we 
will get you another college. We will bargain hard. They have seats to fill.’ ‘It scares me to even think of 
studying at these places. Liquor barons running colleges?’ ‘Yeah, politicians, builders, beedi-makers. 
Anybody with experience in a shady business does really well in education,’ Sunil said. He picked his straw 
to lick the cream off. ‘Really?’ I said. ‘Shouldn’t academicians be opening colleges? Like exprofessors?’ 
‘Are you crazy? Education is not for wusses. There’s a food chain of people at every step,’ Sunil said. He 
jiggled his leg as he spoke to me. He took out his mobile phone. Cellphones had started to
become common, but they still counted as a status symbol. Sunil called someone who seemed to be in a 
crisis. ‘Calm down, Chowbey-ji. MLA Shukla-ji has blessed the fair. Yes, it is closing time. Give us two more 
hours ... Hold on.’ Sunil turned to me. ‘Events business, always on my toes,’ he said to me in an undertone. 
‘Mind if I step out? I’ll be back.’ ‘Sure,’ I said. I sat alone with my drink. I scanned the crowd. Rich kids 
bought overpriced donghnuts and cookies to go with their whipped-cream coffee. Two men in leather 
jackets came inside CCD. I recognised them from the funeral. I shilled sideways on my seat to avoid them. 
However, they had already seen me. They walked up to my table. ‘Celebrating your fathers death?’ said 
one. His muscular arm kept a cup of chai on the table. ‘I don’t have the money right now,’ I said in a soft 
voice. ‘Then we will take your balls,’ said the person with the moustache. He gripped a can of Coke in his 
right hand. ‘Except they are not worth a lakh each,’ the teacup goon said. They laughed. Sunil returned 
after his call. He was surprised to see the new guests. ‘Your friends?’ he said. I shook my head. ‘His 
father’s,’ said the teacup guy. ‘I have seen you ...’ Sunil said. ‘ I his is our town. We are everywhere,’ the 
Coke guy said. ‘You work for MLA Shukla-ji, don’t you?’ Sunil said. ‘None of your business,’ the teacup guy 
said, his voice a tad nervous. ‘I saw you at his house. Hi, I’m Sunil. I am a manager at Sunshine Events. We 
work with MLA Shukla-ji a lot.’ Sunil extended his hand. After a few seconds of hesitation, they shook 
Sunil’s hand. ‘Your friend owes us money. He’d better pay up soon. Or else.’ The teacup guy paused after 
‘or else’, partly for effect but mostly because he didn’t know what to say next. Sunil and I kept quiet. The 
moustache goon tapped the table three times with his bike key. After a few
more glares they left. I let out a huge sigh. Fear had flushed my face red. ‘I don’t need college. I’d be dead 
soon anyway,’ I said. ‘You okay?’ Sunil said. ‘Let me get some more coffee.’ I’d have preferred he gave the 
extra money to me instead of more coffee, but kept silent. Over my second cup, I gave Sunil a summary of 
the story so far - my childhood, Kota, my failure, Baba’s death. Sunil placed his empty cup on the table with 
a clink. ‘So now you have loans. And no source to pay them?’ he summarised. ‘My home, maybe. But it is 
not worth much. And I won’t have a place to live in after that.’ ‘And the property dispute?’ I had mentioned 
the property dispute to Sunil in brief. I had not given him specific details. ‘That’s an old dispute,’ I said, 
surprised Sunil caught on to it. ‘What property is this?’ ‘Agricultural land,’ I said dully. ‘Where?’ he said. 
‘Ten kilometres outside the city.’ Sunil’s eyes opened wide. ‘That’s quite close. How big is the land?’ ‘Thirty 
acres. Our share is fifteen acres’ ‘And what does your uncle say?’ ‘Nothing. He wants the full thing. It is a 
mess. Many papers are forged. The case has been going on for twelve years’ I finished my beverage. ‘So 
yes, I’m fucked. Maybe they can sell my house and recover the money. Thanks for the coffee.’ I stood up 
to leave. ‘What will you do?’ Sunil said, still in his seat and pensive. ‘I will join a shady part-time college and 
take whatever job I can get.' ‘Wait, sit down,’ Sunil said. ‘What?’ I sat down. ‘I’ll suggest something to you. 
And I will help you with it as well. But I need a cut. A big cut.’
‘Cut?’ I said. Cut of what, my fucked-up life? ‘So, ten per cent. Done?’ Sunil said. ‘Of what?’ ‘Of whatever 
you make. Ten per cent equity in your venture.’ ‘What venture?’ I said, exasperated. ‘You will open a 
college.’ ‘What?!’ ‘Relax,’ Sunil said. ‘Do you take bhang like the sadhus on the ghat?’ I said. How else 
could I account for his hallucinations? ‘See, you have the land. That’s the most important part. Land close 
to the city,’ he said. ‘I don’t have it. The case has been dragging with no end in sight.’ ‘We can fix that.’ 
‘We? Who? And it is agricultural land. You can only grow crops there. It’s the law,’ I said. ‘There are people 
in our country who are above the law,’ Sunil said. ‘Who?’ I said. ‘MLA Shukla-ji,’ he said. ‘Shukla who?’ 
‘Our MLA, Raman Lal Shukla. You’ve never heard of him?’ Sunil said. ‘You mentioned him earlier on the 
phone’ I said. ‘Yes. I have done twenty events with his blessings. How else could I get city authority 
approvals? I personally take his cut to him. I will take you too. For my own cut,’ he said and winked at me. 
‘Cut?’ ‘Yes, cut. Ten per cent. Forgot already?’ ‘What exactly are you saying?’
‘Let us meet Shukla-ji. Bring whatever property papers you have.’ ‘You serious?’ ‘Do I look like someone 
who is not serious?’ Sunil said. I saw his gelled hair and the flashy sunglasses perched on his head. I 
reserved my opinion. ‘You want me to open a college? I haven’t even been to college,’ I said. ‘Most people 
who own colleges in India haven’t. Stupid people go to college. Smart people own them,’ said Sunil. ‘I’ll set 
it up for next week. And remember.’ ‘What?’ He snapped his fingers. ‘My ten per cent.’ Aarti and I went for 
a long boat ride. Her green dupatta flew backward in the early morning breeze. ‘Decided what to do next?’ 
she asked. ‘I am exploring private engineering colleges.’ ‘And?’ ‘Too expensive and too shady,’ I said. I 
paused to rest. The boat stood still in the middle of the river. I wondered if Aarti would come and sit next 
to me to massage my palms. She didn’t. ‘So? What next?’ Aarti said. ‘A correspondence degree and a job.’ 
‘What about the loans?’ ‘Manageable. Baba settled most of them,’ I lied. I did not want to burden her with 
my woes and spoil my time with her. ‘Good. Don’t worry, it will work out.’ She got up to sit next to me. She 
took my hand in hers and, as if thinking of something else, began to crack my knuckles. ‘You are happy 
with Raghav, right?’ I asked. I hoped she wouldn’t be, but was pretending like I wanted her to be. ‘Oh yes’ 
She looked at me with shining eyes. ‘Raghav is a good person.’ I withdrew my hand. She sensed my 
disappointment.
‘I never said he’s not.’ I looked away. ‘You cool?’ ‘Yeah,’ I said and managed a fake smile. ‘How is he, 
anyway?’ ‘Told his parents he won’t take up engineering as a profession. They aren’t too happy with that.’ 
‘He’s an idiot. What will he do?’ ‘Journalism,’ she said. He loves it. 'That’s what he is meant to do. He 
wants to change things. He’s also joined university politics’ ‘Totally stupid,’ I said. 1 picked up the oars 
again. Aarti went back to her seat. We kept silent on the ride back. The splash of oars in the water was the 
only sound breaking the silence. Aarti's hair had grown, and now reached her waist. I saw her eyelashes 
move every time she blinked. The dawn sun seemed to light up her skin from the inside. I avoided looking 
at her lips. If I looked at them I wanted to kiss them. She belongs to someone else now, even your limited 
brain should know that. My head knew this, but my heart didn’t. ‘Why did we grow up, Gopal?’ Aarti said. 
‘Things were so much simpler earlier.’                                                             ? I had never been to an MLA’s 
house before. We reached Shukla-ji’s sprawling bungalow in the Kachehri locality at three in the afternoon. 
Police jeeps were parked outside and security guards surrounded the entire property. Sunil introduced 
himself at the gate, and later we were let in. Several villagers sat in the front lawn, awaiting their turn to 
meet the MLA. Sunil had said MLA Shukla stayed alone. His family mostly stayed abroad as his two sons 
went to college there. Filled with party workers, MLA Shukla’s home resembled a party office more than a 
residence. Sunil had brought along Girish Bedi, ‘an experienced education consultant’. I had a rucksack full 
of property documents and court-related papers. Guards checked my bag three times before we reached 
the MLA’s office. A middle-aged man in a crisp white kurta-pyjama sat behind an ornate, polished wooden 
desk. Despite a slight potbelly, for a politician Shukla-ji could be considered handsome. He gestured at us 
to sit as he continued to speak on his cellphone. ‘Tell the scientist that Shukla wants to see the report first. 
Yes, I have to see it. It’s my Ganga too. Yes, okay, I have a meeting now, bye.’ The MLA sifted through the 
files on his desk as he spoke to us.
‘Sunil, sir. Sunshine Events. W ... we do career fairs,’ Sunil said, the stammer in his voice in sharp contrast 
to his confidence in the outside world. ‘Tell me the work,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Land, sir,’ Sunil said. ‘Where? 
How much?’ Shukla-ji said. His eyes stayed on his files as his ears tuned in. Politicians can multitask better 
than most people. ‘Thirty acres, ten kilometres outside the city on the Lucknow Highway,’ Sunil said. The 
MLA stopped his pen midway. He looked up at us. ‘Whose?’ he said. He closed his files to give us his full 
attention. ‘Mine, sir’ I said. No idea why I called him sir. ‘I am Gopal Mishra.’ I opened my rucksack and 
placed the property documents on the table. ‘And you?’ Shukla-ji said, turning to Bedi. ‘Education 
consultant. He helps design and open new colleges. Our own person,’ Sunil said. ‘New college?’ Shukla-ji 
said. ‘It is agricultural land, sir,’ Sunil said. ‘You can obtain permission to convert agricultural land to 
educational use,’ Bedi spoke for the first time. ‘You look young’ Shukla-ji said to me. ‘Who are your 
parents?’ ‘They died, sir,’ I said. ‘Hmmm. What’s the problem?’ Shukla-ji said. His finger traced the location 
of the land to the centre of the city. ‘My uncle,’ I said. ‘This is right near the upcoming airport,’ Shukla-ji 
said, as he made sense of the map. ‘Is it?’ I said. Shukla-ji picked up his intercom. He told his staff not to 
disturb him until this meeting was over. ‘Gopal, tell me everything about the land dispute,’ Shukla-ji said. 
Over the next hour I told him my entire story. ‘And the fact is I even owe your men two lakhs,’ I said
as I ended my monologue. ‘Would you like tea? Soft drink?’ Shukla-ji said. I shook my head. ‘You owe 
money to my men?’ Shukla-ji said. ‘No sir, not your men,’ Sunil said and stamped my foot. ‘Bedi sir, tell him 
your view.’ I did not realise that the loan sharks operate with the MLA’s blessings, but denied any overt 
links with him. ‘Ideal engineering college site, sir,’ Bedi said. ‘His share of fifteen acres is enough.’ ‘Why 
fifteen? When there is thirty, why would we take fifteen?’ Shukla-ji said. I felt overwhelmed with emotion. 
For the first time in my life a powerful person had shown support for me. I missed out that he said ‘we’. 
Sunil gave me a smug smile. He had brought me to the right place. ‘Fifteen is enough, sir,’ I said, not sure 
how we would get even that. ‘Thirty. Keep the remaining for later. It is close to the city ... Once the college 
opens and the airport is built, we may even get residential or commercial zoning,’ Shukla-ji said. I didn’t 
really understand what he said but I figured he knew more than me. Besides, he seemed to be on my side. 
‘But how will we get this?’ I said. My uncle had been sitting on the property for years. ‘You leave that to 
us,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘You tell me this, can you run a college?’ ‘Me?’ ‘Yes, because you will be the face and 
name of the college. I will be a silent partner,’ he said. ‘But how?’ I said. ‘I have no experience. I have no 
money.’ ‘Mr Bedi will give you the experience. I will give you the money for construction and everything 
else.’ I am missing something here. Why had the world suddenly decided to help me? What’s the catch? 
Sunil understood my dilemma. ‘Shukla-ji sir, if you could tell him your terms. And of course, whatever you 
feel is good for me,’
Sunil said and gave an obsequious grin. 'I don’t want anything. Open a college, it is good for my city,’ 
Shukla-ji said. Nobody believed him. Yet, we had to indulge him. ‘Sir, please,’ Sunil said, ‘that won’t be 
fair.’ ‘I’ll think about my terms. But tell me, boy, are you up to it?’ Shukla-ji looked at me. I think I grew 
older by ten years under that gaze. I hid my hesitation as much as possible. ‘How about we get the land 
and just sell it?’ I said. ‘It is tough to sell the land with all the past cases,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘It is one thing to 
get possession for you, quite another to find a new buyer.’ ‘Exactly. The cases, how do we fix them?’ I 
said. Shukla-ji laughed. ‘We don’t fix cases. We fix the people in the cases’ The MLA had laughed, but his 
eyes showed a firm resolve. He seemed like the kind of guy who could fix people. And more than acquiring 
the land, I wanted to teach my relatives a lesson. ‘If you can fix them, you can take whatever share you 
want,’ I said. ‘Fifteen acres for me,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘I will keep it until the area gets re-zoned to commercial 
or residential. We will make the college in the other fifteen.’ ‘How much ownership in the college do you 
want?’ I said. ‘Whatever you want. College is a trust, no profit there,’ Shukla-ji said with no particular 
expression. ‘Really?’ I said, surprised. ‘It is true,’ Bedi spoke after a long time. ‘Every college must be 
incorporated as a non-profit trust. There are no shareholders, only trustees’ ‘Why would a private player 
open a non-profit college?’ I said. Bedi took a deep breath before he proceeded to explain. ‘Well, you take 
a profit. The trustees can take out cash from the trust, showing it as an expense. Or take some fee in cash, 
and not account for it. Or ask a contractor to pay you back a portion of what you pay them. There are 
many more ways .. Bedi continued speaking till I interrupted him. ‘Wait a minute, aren’t these illegal 
methods?' Everyone fell silent. Shukla-ji spoke after a while. ‘I don’t think this boy can do it. You have 
wasted my time.’ Bedi and Sunil hung their heads in shame. I had let them down with my curiosity about 
propriety.
‘I am sorry, I am only trying to understand,’ I said. ‘What?’ Bedi said, his tone irritated. ‘Are you telling me 
that the only way to make money from a college is through illegal methods? Sorry, I am not being moral, 
only questioning.’ ‘Well,’ Bedi said, ‘you are not actually supposed to make money.’ ‘So why would 
anybody open one?’ I said. ‘For the benefit of society, like us politicians,’ Shukla-ji said. Everyone but me 
broke into laughter. I guess the joke was on stupid, naive me. ‘Listen, Gopal,’ Sunil said, ‘that is how the 
rules are. They are stupid. Now you can either figure out a way around them, or remain clueless. There has 
to be a trust, you and Shukla-ji sir will be trustees. Bedi will explain everything.’ Bedi gave me a reassuring 
nod. Yes, the man knew the system, and how to bend it. ‘Mr Bedi, also explain to the boy not to question 
legality much. Education is not the business for him then,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Of course,’ Bedi smiled. ‘Shukla 
sir, taking money out of the trust is the least of the problems. What about all the permissions and 
approvals required? Every step requires special management.’ ‘So that’s what the boy has to do. I am not 
visible in this. I am only the trustee, to benefit society,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Do what?’ I said. ‘Don’t worry, I will 
explain it,’ Bedi said. ‘You need Varanasi Nagar Nigam’s approval for the building plans, AICTE approval for 
the college. There are inspections. Everyone has to be taken care of. It is standard.’ ‘Bribes?’ I said. ‘Shh!’ 
Shukla-ji reprimanded. ‘Don’t mention all this here. You do your discussions outside. Leave now.’ We stood 
up to go. ‘Stay for a minute, Gopal,’ the MLA said. ‘Yes?’ I said after Sunil and Bedi had left the room.
‘Will you do what it takes?’ Shukla-ji said, ‘I don’t want to waste my time otherwise. Tell me now if you 
want to quit.’ I paused to think. ‘It’s not easy,’ I admitted. ‘It is never easy to become a big man in life,’ 
Shukla-ji said. I kept quiet. ‘You want to be a big man, Gopal?’ I continued to look down. I examined the 
black and white patterns on the Italian marble floor. ‘Or you want to remain an average kid while your 
friends race ahead of you.’ I swallowed the lump in my throat. I looked up to make eye contact with him. 
‘You have a girlfriend, Gopal?’ I shook my head. ‘You know why? Because you are a nobody.’ I nodded. 
The memory of Aarti and Raghav kissing each other passionately in the BHU car park flashed through my 
mind. If I had made it to BHU and Raghav had gone to Kota, would her decision have been different? I saw 
Shukla-ji. Every inch of him felt wrong. But he offered me a chance, A job, an admission, a fucking chance, 
that is all one needs in life sometimes. 'I'll do it. It isn’t like I am the only guy in India paying bribes,’ I said. 
‘But I want to be big.’ Shukla-ji stood up. He came around his desk and patted my back. ‘You are already a 
big man,’ he said, ‘because you have me behind you. Now go, and leave your harami uncles details with my 
secretary outside.’ ‘What about the money I owe your people,’ I said. ‘Two lakhs? It’s a joke for me, forget 
it,’ Shukla-ji said. He went back to his desk and opened a drawer. He took out two bundles of ten-thousand 
rupees and tossed them at me. ‘One for Sunil, the oilier for you,’ he said. ‘Why for me?’ I asked. ‘For 
running my college, Director sir.’ He grinned. I accepted Shukla-ji’s ten thousand bucks, if only to pay for 
basic necessities. I allowed myself one indulgence - I took Aarti out for dinner to Taj Ganga, the most 
expensive restaurant in town.
‘Are you sure?’ Aarti asked again, as we entered the coffee shop at the Taj. ‘We could always eat chaat at 
the ghats.’ She wore a new full length, dark blue dress her relatives had sent from the US. She had matched 
it with fake, understated gold jewellery purchased from Vishwanath Gali. ‘My treat,’ I said. The waiter 
pulled out a chair for Aarti. She thanked him as we sat down. Aarti wanted to watch her weight but eat 
chocolate cake too. We decided to have soup and salad for dinner so we could save calories for dessert. 
She stirred the hot soup with a spoon. ‘Sorry, but how did you get the money for this? Baba left you a huge 
will?’ I laughed. ‘No, he left me loans’ ‘Then?’ ‘I am starting a new business.’ ‘Smuggling?’ Aarti inclined 
her head to one side. ‘Shut up. I am opening a college.’ ‘What?’ Aarti said, loud enough for the entire place 
to hear. ‘Sorry,’ she whispered. ‘Did you say you are opening a college?’ ‘Yeah, on my disputed land.’ 
‘How? Isn’t the land stuck? And how will you make the college?’ ‘I have partners. Good partners’ ‘Who?’ 
Aarti said. ‘I’ll tell you. We are finalising plans’ ‘Really?’ Aarti said. ‘Oh, so you are serious?’ ‘Yeah, it is 
fifteen acres right outside the city. If we settle the dispute and get re-zoning done, it is ideal for a college,’ 
I repeated Bedi’s words. ‘Wow,’ Aarti said and chuckled. ‘You are hitting the big time, Gopal.’ She meant it 
as a joke, but it hurt a little. ‘Why? You didn’t think I could?’ ‘No, I didn’t mean that,’ Aarti said. ‘I am just... 
surprised.’ ‘I have to do something in life.’
‘Sure. You will do more than something. What about your uncle?’ ‘We are trying to reach an amicable 
settlement with him,’ I said. Shukla’s men, who handled the loan-shark business, had initiated the 
settlement process with Ghanshyam taya-ji. Amicable is not the word one could use to describe their 
methods. They had visited my uncles house thrice. The first time they emptied a bottle of goat’s blood in 
his front balcony. The second time they stabbed all the sofas and beds in the house with an assortment of 
knives. The third time, when they finally spoke, they brought out guns and proposed to buy off my uncles 
share of disputed land for eight lakh rupees. I did not want to give Aarti all these extra details. ‘What kind 
of college?’ she said. ‘Engineering.’ ‘Cool,’ Aarti said. ‘If I want to be a big man, I have to do big things,’ I 
said. ‘You were always a big man to me, Gopal. You know why?’ ‘Why?’ ‘Because you have a big heart.’ 
Aarti lightly stroked my hand on the table. My heart, big or small, skipped a beat at her touch. I quickly 
launched into small talk. ‘How are things with you? How’s college?’ ‘B-o-r-ing. But I am joining an aviation 
academy.’ ‘What’s that?’ ‘They train you to become a flight attendant. The classrooms look like the 
interiors of a plane.’ ‘Really?’ I mused, ‘There is so much happening in education.’ ‘Yeah, most of us only 
get to be students. Not everyone can open a college,’ she teased. I smiled. ‘Long way to go. It’s difficult,’ 
1 said. ‘You have faced more difficult things in life before. You will make it,’ Aarti said confidently. ‘You 
think so?’ I said. She nodded. Her nod meant the world to me. I wanted to ask her to date me again. 
Somehow I thought with my new college plan she might be inclined to say yes. Of course, only my brain 
comes up with
such flimsy theories. ‘How’s Raghav?’ I asked, to bring myself back to reality. ‘A bit low, actually,’ she said. 
I felt a warm glow. ‘Really? Why?’ I expressed fake concern. ‘He lost university elections for general 
secretary.’ ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘Does it matter?’ ‘It did to him. He lost because he wouldn’t horse-trade with other 
hostels. He wanted to fight fair.’ 'I’m not surprised he lost,’ I said, spearing a carrot. 'He believes one has 
to be fair and win. Else, what is the point of winning?’ Aarti said. 'Life doesn’t work like that, does it?’ I 
said, chewing slowly. ‘I don’t know. That is how it should work,’ Aarti said. ‘He’s going to contest again 
next year.’ ‘Doesn’t he do too much?’ I said. ‘Oh yeah, between his BTech course, magazine and elections, 
he hardly has any time for me.’ ‘And you like that?’ ‘No, but I have no choice. If it makes him happy, so be 
it.’ We finished our dinner. The chocolate cake arrived. Her eyes lit up. She pulled the plate towards 
herself. ‘Don’t steal my cake,’ she said and grinned. ‘Raghav is such a lucky guy to have you, Aarti,’ I said. 
‘Thanks,’ she said and gave a shy smile. ‘Aarti, can I ask you something?’ ‘Yeah?’ She looked at me, her 
spoon poised above the cake. ‘Nothing, leave some cake for me if you can,’ I said and signalled for the bill.                                                        
? The doorbell woke me at midnight. I rubbed my eyes and reached for the door, still half asleep. My uncle, 
aunt and their son, my thirty-year-old cousin Ajay, stood outside.
‘Ghanshyam taya-ji?’ I said. ‘What happened? Please come in’ My relatives sat on the torn sofa in the front 
room. They didn’t speak for five minutes. ‘You have not come so late because you missed me, right?’ I 
said. ‘Why are you doing this to us?’ Ajay exploded. ‘Doing what?’ I said. ‘Do you want water? Tea?’ ‘No,’ 
my uncle said. ‘Gopal, pay attention to your karma. God is watching. You will have to pay one day. Do not 
do this to us.’ ‘Do what?’ I said. And why had they come at this time of the night? ‘Bittoo hasn’t come 
home from nursery school,’ my aunt said and burst into tears. This time they seemed real, unlike the 
crocodile ones at Baba’s funeral. They had come home because Bittoo, Ajay’s four-year-old son whom I 
had seen only once (in his mother’s lap, at my father’s funeral), was missing. ‘Oh, that is terrible,’ I said. 
‘And this is about my karma?’ ‘It’s those people, who want to buy the land,’ my uncle said. ‘We know they 
are with you.’ ‘What are you talking about?’ I said. My uncle folded his hands. ‘Don’t do this to us,’ he said. 
‘I am not doing anything. Some people came to me to buy the land too. But I told them I cannot sell it,’ I 
said. ‘Really?’ Ajay said. ‘How can I? It’s disputed, right?’ I said. ‘But the people who came to us don’t want 
to buy. They want us to settle the bank cases, settle the dispute and give it all to you,’ uncle said. “That’s 
strange. So now the question is do you value the land more or Bittoo? Correct?’ ‘Shut up,’ Ajay said. ‘We 
know it is you who wants to buy it.’ ‘I don’t have money to buy food. How can I buy land?’ I scratched my 
head. ‘Who are these people?’ my uncle said. ‘I don’t know. You can go to the police,’ I said, ‘but they 
sound like crooks’
‘Avoid the police,’ my aunt said. ‘They can do anything. Bittoo is a little, young thing, it won’t be difficult to 
hide his body. Anyway, it is Varanasi, dead bodies are easy to dispose of,’ I said. Ajay jumped up from the 
sofa and grabbed my collar. ‘I know you are involved. Your father was straight, you are not,’ he said, his 
eyes wild. ‘Leave my collar, brother, right now,’ I said in a calm but firm tone. Ajay’s mother tugged at her 
son’s hand. Ajay released me. ‘What are they offering?’ I said. ‘Eight lakhs,' my uncle said. ‘That’s not bad,’ 
I said. ‘That’s a fraction of the market price.’ ‘But more than double of what you offered me,’ I said. ‘You 
are involved.’ Ajay glared at me. ‘Go home, taya-ji, and think it over. We all love Bittoo more than the 
land.’ ‘Why is this happening to us?’ my aunt exclaimed at the door. ‘It’s all karma. Taya-ji will explain it to 
you.’ I smiled as I shut the door.                                                           ? It took three nights without Bittoo to 
make my relatives realise the value of the eight-lakh offer. I received a call from the MLAs office when Mr 
Ghanshyam Mishra and Mr Ajay Mishra signed the papers. ‘Sharma here, PA to Shukla-ji’ the caller said. 
‘MLA sahib has invited you for dinner tonight.’ ‘Cheers’ Shukla-ji said as we clinked our whisky glasses 
together. Bedi, Sunil and I sat with him in his huge living room. It had three separate seating areas with 
plush velvet sofas, coffee tables and elaborate lamps and chandeliers. Three waiters served kebabs, nuts 
and mini-samosas in napkin-lined china plates. I noticed pictures of Shukla-ji’s family on the wall. ‘Nikhil 
and Akhil, my sons,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Both are studying in the US. Will keep them away for a while.’ Some 
said Shukla-ji was divorced. Others said he had another family in Lucknow. I didn’t feel the
need to know. ‘Land is a big step,’ Bedi said grimly. ‘But there’s a long way to go. We are meeting the VNN 
people next week. Meanwhile, we should take care of the trust formalities.’ Bedi explained how VNN, or 
the municipality, would give us the crucial agricultural-to-educational land re-zoning permit and clear plans 
so we can commence construction. ‘Get the re-zoning done soon. I’ve not paid eight lakhs for the land to 
grow rice,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘We will,’ Bedi said. ‘They know who is behind this. You are not a small entity, 
sir.’ ‘That is true,’ Shukla-ji said in a dismissive tone to Bedi for stating the obvious. ‘But we have to take 
care of VNN, no?’ ‘Yes, of course,’ Bedi said. ‘It’s re-zoning. The land value multiplies five times. Not 
cheap.’ ‘How much?’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Of course, the rate is different for you. I’d imagine ten lakhs.’ ‘What?’ 
Shukla-ji said, shocked. Bedi finished his drink in a large sip. ‘It’s thirty acres, sir. For a normal person it 
would be forty.’ ‘See, that is why people like me have to come to education. What is happening in this 
country?’ Shukla-ji said. 'DM has to bless it too. But Pradhan is honest. However, if it is for a college, and 
VNN recommends, he will approve it,’ Bedi said. ‘How honest?' Shukla-ji said. ‘Honest enough to not take 
money. But not so honest that he will stop others from taking it.’ "That’s good. If you are honest, keep it 
to yourself’ Sunil said, speaking for the first time that evening. ‘Sunil,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘What, sir?’ ‘You leave 
now. I will send something lor you. But we will take care of this project from now,’ Shukla ji said. ‘Sir, 
but...’ Sunil said. ‘You have done your job,’ Shukla ji said and handed him a bottle of Johnnie Walker Black 
Label.
Sunil took the cue. He thanked him for the bottle, bowed as much as the human spine allowed and left. ‘I 
know DM Pradhan, his daughter is a friend,’ I told Shukla-ji. ‘Not much of an issue there. Still, good to have 
his blessings,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Sure,’ I said. Shukla-ji went inside his bedroom. He returned with a heavy 
plastic bag. He gave it to me. ‘What’s this?’ I said. ‘Ten lakhs,’ he said, ‘for VNN.’ ‘Ten lakhs?’ I said. My 
hands trembled as I held the heavy bag. I had never seen, or lifted that much money. ‘It’s just a number,’ 
the MLA said. ‘Bedi-ji, help the boy. And help yourself too. I don’t like empty glasses.’ ‘Sure, Shukla-ji,’ Bedi 
said and called for the waiter. ‘Are people in education happy with money or they want other stuff too?’ 
Shukla-ji asked Bedi. ‘Like what?’ Bedi asked. ‘Girls, if they want to have a good time. I have a man, Vinod, 
who can arrange that,’ MLA Shukla said. ‘Oh, will let you know. Money usually does the job though,’ Bedi 
said. ‘Good.’ He changed track. ‘Can Gopal work from your office for a while? Until he has his own?’ ‘Of 
course, Shukla-ji.’ The waiters ran to refill our glasses. ‘The trust papers are ready. We can sign them this 
week. But one question, Gopal,’ Bedi said. ‘What?’ I said. ‘What’s the name of the college?’ Bedi said. I 
hadn’t thought about it. ‘I have no idea. Maybe something that signifies technology.’
‘And our city,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Let me tell people I did this for them when the time comes.’ ‘GangaTech?’ I 
said. Shukla-ji patted my shoulder. ‘Well done. I like you, Gopal. You will go very far.’ Shukla-ji personally 
filled my glass to the brim with whisky. I fipped through the documents Bedi had plonked on my desk. 1 sat 
in an  extra room at his education consultancy office. ' Pay to incorporate a trust?’ I said. 'Yes, to the 
Registrar of Companies. Every trust has to he registered there ,' Bedi said. ' But why pay a bribe? We are 
opening a non-profit trust,' [ said. ' We are paying a bribe because if we don’t the Registrar will stall our 
approval.’ He was irritated. I sighed in disbelief. ‘Anyway, forty thousand maximum. Now, can you please 
sign here?’ Bedi said. Over the next two hours I signed on every page of the six copies of the forty-page 
GangaTech education Trust incorporation document. I cracked my knuckles while Bedi hunted up some 
more stuff for me to sign. ‘What’s this?’ I said when he handed me a stack of letters. Each letter had a 
thick set of files attached to it. ‘Your application to the University Grants Commission, or the UGC, to open 
a college. The files contain details about the proposed college.’ I went through the files. It had sections 
such as course descriptions, facilities offered and faculty hiring plan. ‘It is standard stuff, taken from earlier 
applications,’ Bedi said. I signed the letters. ‘So, they send an approval or what?’ I said. ‘They will send a 
date for inspection of the site. Once they inspect, they will give you an in-principle approval to start 
construction.’ ‘I imagine we have to pay somebody to clear the inspection?’ I said. Bedi laughed. ‘You 
learn fast. Of course, we pay. A thick packet to every inspector. However, right now we pay to obtain an 
inspection date. First things first.’
My eyebrows went up. ‘Joking, right?’ I said. ‘No, any government work, especially in education, requires a 
fee. Get used to it.’ He then listed out the palms we had to grease in order to open a place to teach kids in 
our country. Apart from the UGC, we had to apply to AICTE, or the All India Council for Technical 
Education. They clear the engineering colleges. Also, every private college requires a government 
university affiliation. For that, we had to get approvals from the vice-chancellor of a state university. 
Shukla-ji’s connections and a generous envelope would do the trick. ‘Otherwise the vice-chancellor can 
create a lot of hassle,’ Bedi said, speaking from past experience. ‘So, who are these UGC and AICTE 
inspectors, anyway?’ I said. ‘University lecturers from government colleges are appointed as inspectors. Of 
course, since it is such a lucrative job, the lecturers have to bribe to become one,’ Bedi said. ‘Whom?’ 
‘Senior management at UGC, or someone in the education ministry. Anyway, that is their business. We 
have to focus on ours. Please inform Shukla-ji we will need funds for all this.’ I nodded. ‘Don’t forget the 
VNN meeting,’ Bedi said. ‘And definitely don’t forget the bag.’ ‘I can’t wait to get rid of it,’ I said. ‘It is 
scary to keep so much cash in the house.’ ‘Don’t worry,’ Bedi said. ‘One VNN visit and it will all be gone.’                                                             
? We reached the Varanasi Nagar Nigam office, opposite Shaheed Udyaan, at six in the evening. The 
official had told us to come after working hours. If you are willing to pay, government offices can do more 
overtime than MNCs. ‘Welcome, welcome. I am Sinha,’ a man greeted us in the empty reception area. He 
led us upstairs. We climbed up two floors of the dilapidated building. Sinha, deputy-corporator, had known 
Shukla-ji for over a decade and referred to him as his brother. ‘If my big brother wants it, consider it done,’ 
Sinha said. He didn’t mention that big brother would need to give little brother a gift. I took out the maps, 
property documents and our formal application. Sinha pored over them with a sonorous ‘hmmm. ‘We can 
only start when we have the land re-zoned,’ I said. ‘Re-zoning is tough,’ Sinha said. ‘Higher-ups have to 
approve.’
‘How long will it take?’ I said. ‘You look young,’ Sinha said. ‘Excuse me?’ I said. ‘Impatience, the first folly 
of youth. You are opening a college, what is the hurry?’ ‘Its still going to take years. But I want to get all 
the approvals done,’ I said. Bedi signalled me to be quiet. Sinha laughed. ‘Don’t you have to get the 
building plan approval too?’ the deputy-corporator said. ‘Yes,’ Bedi said. ‘Can your junior officers handle 
that?’ ‘Send the documents to me, send everything home. Everything’, Sinha said, stressing the last word. I 
got the drift. I patted the plastic bag I had kept on the floor. ‘I have brought something here,’ I said. 'In the 
office?’ Sinha stood up hurriedly. ‘Are you crazy?’ I had brought the money to show how serious we were 
about getting the job done. Obviously, I didn’t expect him to take cash over the counter. ‘Bedi sir, teach 
him how it is done. He will be a disaster,’ Sinha said, as he led us out of the office. I hugged the heavy, red 
plastic bag closer. ‘How much, by the way?’ Sinha enquired as we came outside. ‘Ten,’ I said. ‘Not for re-
zoning and building plan,’ Sinha said. ‘It’s a college, please be reasonable,’ I said. ‘I am being reasonable. 
But ten is too less. Fifteen,’ Sinha said. ‘No concession for Shukla-ji?’ I said. ‘This is already half of what I 
take,’ Sinha said. ‘Eleven?’ I said. I was bargaining with him as if I was buying a T-shirt. Of course, the 
thought of the amount involved numbed me.
‘Twelve and a half. Done! Do not embarrass me before my big brother,’ Sinha said. I didn’t argue further. I 
had to make arrangements for the remaining cash. ‘You are a good bargainer,’ Bedi said to me while 
dropping me off at Shukla-ji’s residence. ? ‘You smash it,’ said Shukla-ji, handing me a coconut at the 
entrance of the college site. A crowd of his sycophants surrounded us. The bhoomi pujan ceremony 
marked the beginning of construction. I had run around for three months to obtain the two dozen 
approvals to make this day possible. The UGC and AICTE in-principle approvals had finally arrived. The final 
inspections would be conducted when the college was ready to open. For now, we had permission to begin 
construction. The only other thing we needed were god’s blessings. Fortunately, that didn’t require a 
bundle of cash. I held the coconut in my hand and looked around. Aarti hadn’t arrived. ‘Do it, son,’ Shukla-ji 
said. I couldn’t wait for her any longer. I guess the day did not mean as much to her as it did to me. I 
smashed the fruit, imagining it to be Raghavs head. As it cracked, a sliver of the shell cut my finger. People 
clapped around me. I took the cut finger to my mouth and sucked the bruise. ‘GangaTech Engineering 
College’ - two labourers fixed a metal hoarding in the muddy ground. I should have felt more emotion. 
After all, I had slogged for months. However, I felt nothing. Maybe because I knew the exact amount of 
bribes it took to reach this day. Seventy-two lakhs, twenty-three thousand and four hundred rupees to 
obtain everything from electricity connections to construction site labour approvals. Shukla-ji had invited 
over a hundred guests, including members of the press. We had a caterer who served hot samosas and 
jalebis in little white boxes. Shukla-ji addressed everyone from a makeshift dais. ‘Three more years, and 
this dream will be a reality. This is a gift to my city, which deserves the best,’ he said. I sat in the front row. 
I kept turning around to see if Aarti had arrived. After Shukla-ji’s speech the press asked questions. Most 
were simple, relating to the courses that would be on offer and the upcoming college facilities. However, a 
few tough journalists did not spare him.
‘Shukla sir, are you the owner of this college? How much is your stake?’ one reporter asked. ‘I am a 
trustee. I have no stake. It is a non-profit entity,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Who is funding the land and construction?’ 
‘Mr Gopal Mishra here owns this land. I want to encourage young talent so I helped him raise some funds,’ 
Shukla-ji said and wiped his forehead with a handkerchief. ‘Funds from where?’ the reporter continued. 
‘From various benefactors. Don’t worry, somebody has given money, not taken it. Media is so suspicious 
these days,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Sir, what is happening in the Ganga Action Plan scam? You are named in that,’ a 
reporter from the last row asked. ‘It is an old and dead story. There is no scam. We spent the money to 
clean the river,’ Shukla-ji said. This new topic galvanised all the reporters. Everyone raised their hand as 
they scrambled to ask questions. ‘No more questions, thank you very much,’ Shukla-ji said. The reporters 
ran behind him as he left the site. I stayed back, ensuring that the guests were served the refreshments. A 
truck arrived with bricks, iron rods and other construction materials. Behind it, I saw a white Ambassador 
car with a red light on top. Aarti got out of the car upon spotting me. ‘I am so so so sorry,’ she said. Are 
the prayers over?’ ‘Can the prayers ever be over without Aarti?’ I said.                                      Varanasi         
Three More Years Later My arrival went unnoticed amidst loud music and the chatter of people. High-class 
parties make me nervous and I would have happily skipped Raghavs graduation bash that day if I could. I 
only went because I didn’t want to come across as envious. I felt no envy. My college, GangaTech, was to 
open in three months. After three years of working day
and night, I had my building ready. I even had faculty recruitment interviews lined up and had obtained a 
date for the AICTE inspection. A stupid BHU degree meant little when I’d be issuing my own degrees soon. 
‘Hey!’ Raghav said in a slightly tipsy voice. ‘Buddy, where were you?’ ‘Negotiating with a computer 
supplier,’ I said. Raghav didn’t seem to hear. ‘For my college. We are setting up a computer centre,’ I said. 
Raghav raised his hand. ‘Good show. Give me a high-five!’ He clapped my hand with his so hard that it hurt. 
‘You need a drink,’ Raghav said. ‘There’s the bar.’ He gestured towards the dining table, on which were 
beer, rum and coke. People made their own drinks in plastic glasses. Raghavs parents had agreed to spend 
the night at some relative’s house so that Raghav and his college-mates could have a night of debauchery. 
I looked around at Raghavs pals. Thirty boys, most of them wearing glasses and old T-shirts and jabbering 
about job offers, and only three girls, who - given their lack of fashion sense - had to be from an 
engineering college. I got myself a rum and coke. I looked for ice. There was none on the dining table, so I 
headed for the kitchen. A girl with long tresses, her back to me, was arranging candles on a huge chocolate 
cake. The cake had a gear-shaped design on it and said ‘Happy Graduation in perky white marzipan letters. 
‘Gopal!’ Aarti said as she saw me struggle with the ice-tray I’d removed from the fridge. Her voice startled 
me. ‘It’s been like,’ Aarti said, ‘a year?’ I had not kept in touch with her. ‘Hi,’ I said. It’s not like I wanted to 
evade her. But I saw no upside to remaining in touch either, I found it more productive to scream at 
construction workers than hear stories about her dates with her boyfriend. I started avoiding her calls and 
soon she too drifted away. ‘Yeah, I am sorry, my fault,’ I said. ‘I got very busy at the site.’ She took the ice-
tray from me, twisted it to release the ice-cubes and put two of them in my glass.
I am not asking for an explanation. I understand I am not that important to you now.’ ‘That is not true. I 
had my site, you had Raghav,’ I said. ‘We have our own lives and...’ ‘I have a boyfriend. Doesn’t mean it is 
my entire life, okay?’ Aarti said. ‘Well, he kind of is, isn’t he?’ I said, I offered her my drink. She declined. 
She went back to decorating the cake. ‘Nothing like that. No one person can be that important.’ ‘Why?’ I 
said. ‘Something wrong?’ ‘No, no,’ she said, too quickly I thought. ‘It’s great. Raghav’s graduated. He has 
a job offer from Infosys. My aviation course finishes soon. It is still as strong as ever.’ ‘What?’ I said. ‘Us.’ 
‘Us?’ ‘Me and Raghav,’ she said. ‘Of course,’ I said. She lifted the cake to take it to Raghav. ‘I’ll keep in 
touch,’ I said. ‘That would be nice. I haven’t sat in a boat for a year’ she said and smiled. The confusing, 
confounding Aarti had returned. What did she mean? Did she miss the boat rides? Did she miss being with 
me? Was she tossing a bone at me or was she just being witty? I came out of the kitchen, lost in my 
thoughts. Everyone gathered around Raghav. He held a knife in his hand. Aarti stood next to him. Raghav 
cut the cake. Everyone clapped and hooted. I guess graduating from college is a big deal. Raghav fed the 
first piece to Aarti. Aarti offered a piece to Raghav. As he opened his mouth, Aarti smeared the cake 0n his 
face. Everyone guffawed and clapped hard. I felt out of place. What the fuck was I doing here? Why did 
these guys even invite me? ‘Speech! Speech!’ the crowd began to demand of Raghav. Aarti took a tissue 
and wiped his face. ‘Well, friends, congrats to all of you on your graduation,’ Raghav said. ‘We have spent 
four fabulous years together. As we get ahead with our lives, I am sure we will always have a special place 
for our
campus in our hearts’ ‘We will still be together, dude,’ a bespectacled boy interrupted him, ‘at Infosys.’ 
Seven people raised their glasses high in the air. They all had offers from the software company. ‘Cheers!’ 
they said. Raghav kept quiet. ‘Actually, I have an announcement,’ he said. ‘I won’t be taking up the job 
offer.’ ‘What?!’ people exclaimed in unison. ‘Yes, I have decided to stay here,’ Raghav said and draped his 
arm around Aarti’s waist, ‘to be near my love.’ ‘Yeah, right,’ Aarti said, wiping a blob of icing from 
Raghav’s cheek. ‘Tell them the real reason.’ ‘That is the real reason,’ he chuckled. ‘No,’ Aarti said, turning 
to the crowd. ‘Mr Raghav Kashyap is staying back to join Dainik as a reporter.’ Murmurs of surprise ran 
through the crowd. Raghav had edited the college magazine, and even done a newspaper internship. 
However, few knew he had the courage to chuck Infosys to become a newspaper reporter. Raghav 
chatted with his friends. Aarti sliced the cake for everyone. The music became loud again. I made another 
drink and leaned against the wall, wondering if I should leave. Aarti offered me cake on a paper plate. I 
declined. ‘So, when does your college open?’ she said. ‘In three months GangaTech starts admissions,’ I 
said. ‘Really? Can I apply?’ She laughed. ‘I’ll print you a degree if you want, you do not even have to attend 
classes,’ I said. ‘Really?’ she said, wagging a finger. ‘Yeah, give me an Electronics Engineer degree like 
Raghav’s. But better marks than him.’ ‘Sure,’ I said. She laughed even more. I had tried so hard the last 
four years to get over Aarti. Yet, one laugh of hers had set back years of effort. Suddenly it felt like we had 
never been apart. I had to leave. ‘I better go,’ I muttered.
‘Why?’ she said, ‘You just came.’ ‘I don’t fit in here.’ ‘It’s okay. I hardly know these people either. All nerdy 
engineers. Come, let’s go to the balcony.’                                                           ? We sat in Raghav’s balcony. I 
took little sips of my drink. The breeze blew Aarti s hair in my face. I moved away a bit. ‘You finished your 
course at the aviation academy?’ I said. ‘Yes, Frankfinn ended two months ago. I am applying to all the 
airlines. Let’s see if they call me for interviews,’ she said. ‘There’s no airline in Varanasi.’ ‘Yeah, I’ll have to 
move to Delhi or Mumbai. There’s even a new low-cost airline in Bangalore. It depends.’ ‘On what?’ I said. 
‘Where I get a job. Of course, now it is complicated as Raghav’s here.’ ‘He can be a journalist in other 
cities too,’ I said. ‘I guess,’ she said as she tucked her hair behind her ear. ‘But he likes Varanasi. He knows 
this place and the issues here. How is your drink? Can I take a sip?’ I gave her my glass. ‘How much does he 
get paid for this Dainik job?’ I said. I had to know how much Raghav made. She took a few sips and kept 
the glass for herself. ‘A third of what Infosys would give him,’ she said. 'Wow. And his parents are okay 
with it?’ 'No way! They went ballistic when he told them. It isn’t just about the money, he isn’t using his 
engineering degree. They are still upset.’ ‘So?’ ‘So what? He doesn’t care. He feels the revolution begins at 
home. Society changes only when individual family norms are challenged.’ ‘Revolution?’ I said. ‘Oh yeah, 
he is quite into that. The Great Indian Revolution. Oops, I finished your drink. I am so
sorry,’ she said and touched my arm in apology 'It’s fine. I’ll make another one. And you are cool with his 
career choice?’ 'Of course, I believe one should follow their passion. Am I not working towards mine? So 
an air hostess isn’t the same as a revolution, but still, that’s me.’ ‘What exactly is this revolution?’ I said, 
irritated. ‘Well, Raghav believes there will be a real people’s revolution in India one day, that’s his thing.’ 
‘Why?’ ‘Ask him, he will explain it to you. Wait, I will get us more drinks.’ She went back in. I waited in the 
balcony. I did not want to be with the smug software types inside. I imagined a day when students from my 
college would get jobs. I wondered if big software companies would ever visit GangaTech. Of course, we 
had to open for admissions first. She came back with a tray. It had two drinks, and a plate with sandwiches, 
cake and potato chips. ‘I thought you might be hungry’ she said, Aarti cannot help but be the caring mother 
types. ‘Thanks,’ I said, taking my glass. ‘Now tell me, why did you forget me?’ Aarti said. ‘Who said I had 
forgotten you?’ I said. Our eyes met. It felt awkward alter about three seconds. I blinked first. ‘I have a 
mobile phone now. Do you want my number?’ she said. ‘Sure,’ I said. Shukla-ji had given me a cellphone 
too. We exchanged numbers. ‘I’d like to see your college sometime,’ she said. ‘Let it open. I’ll do an 
inauguration,’ I said. ‘Is the college your passion?’ she said. ‘I don’t know. It’s the best opportunity life 
gave me.’ ‘Have you felt passionate about anything, Gopal? It’s an amazing feeling,’ Aarti said. I remained 
silent as I stared at her, my passion. ‘Anything?’ she said.
‘Money, I want to make lots of money,’ I said. She threw up her hands in the air. ‘Oh, come on,’ Aarti said, 
‘That’s not passion. That’s ambition.’ ‘I don’t know, let’s go in.’ I stood up. I didn’t want Raghav to see us 
alone. ‘Stay here,’ she said cajolingly and pulled me down by my hand. ‘We haven’t met for ages. What are 
you up to? Do you have a girlfriend?’ I shook my head. ‘You should get one. It is amazing to be in love. A 
feeling even better than passion,’ she said. ‘Its amazing to be in love only when the other person loves you 
back,’ I said. I regretted my statement instantly. ‘Ouch! Below the belt.’ ‘I am sorry,’ I said. ‘That was so 
long ago. And Raghav and I are happy. So happy ‘Should we go back in?’ I said. ‘If you are willing to open 
up,’ Aarti said, you can find someone nice, Gopal.’ ‘I don’t need anyone,’ I said and looked away. She held 
my chin and turned my face towards her. ‘You will own a college. I will be just a flight attendant selling 
chips, if I am lucky. You can get someone better.’ ‘Someone better than you?’ I said. ‘Totally,’ she said. 
‘That is not possible, Aarti,’ I said. Before she could answer, I stood up again and returned to the party. I 
went up to Raghav and told him I had to leave to meet a contractor. He didn’t seem to mind it much. I 
came outside his apartment and took the stairs down. Aarti came after me. ‘Gopal!’ I looked back at her 
from the steps. ‘What?’ I said. ‘Don’t tell me you still have feelings for me?’ I swallowed hard. ‘Not at all,’ I 
said and sprinted out. How long is your break?’ I shouted. A group of labourers sat under the banyan tree 
near the main
campus building. ‘Its two-thirty, lunch ended an hour ago.’ We had only a week left for the final AICTE 
inspection. The classrooms needed a last lick of paint. The workers didn’t care. ‘Your work will be done, 
sahib,’ said one of the workers, folding the newspaper he had been sitting on. He wore a tattered vest and 
dark trousers with cream paint all over it. ‘My college wont open if the inspector is unhappy with us,’ I said. 
‘Who is going to say no to your college?’ the worker stood up. The other workers tightened their turbans. 
They picked up their brushes and moved to the classrooms. 1 remained under the banyan tree, exhausted 
by my daily ritual of hauling up the men every two hours. I glanced down at the newspaper left behind by 
the workers. A headline caught my attention: ‘Varanasi needs more colleges’. I picked up the newspaper. 
Under the headline was the writers name - Raghav Kashyap. The article talked about how the youth 
population of Varanasi had grown significantly in the last ten years. At the same time, the number of 
colleges had not kept pace with the demand. It made recommendations on how the government could 
make education a priority. He even argued that the government should allow colleges to make a legitimate 
profit, so that corporate bodies could enter the sector and improve quality. Even though it came from 
Raghav, I liked the article. It augured well for my business. The article had a separate box with a list of 
colleges about to open in Varanasi. It had five names, and I saw GangaTech in the list. ‘Wow,’ I said to 
myself, excited. I had never seen GangaTech’s name in print. I dialled Shukla-ji’s number. ‘Well done!’ 
Shukla-ji said. ‘Wait and see how much press we get when we open.’ I wanted to call Raghav and ask if he 
could do a detailed piece on my college. A reputed newspaper talking well about GangaTech could do 
wonders for our opening. I didn’t have his mobile number. I could easily obtain it from Aarti. However, I 
didn’t want to call her. I took the newspaper to the campus building. My office still didn’t have furniture. I 
sat on a plastic chair and reminded myself to call the carpenter. I looked at my phone contacts. Aarti 
always came first, given that her name begins with ‘Aa’. ‘I am only calling her to get Raghav’s number,’ I 
told myself many times before I felt courageous enough to call. She picked up after four rings. ‘Hey, what 
a surprise,’ she said.
‘Hi, how are you?’ I said. I did not want to exchange pleasantries. However, to jump directly to my query 
seemed abrupt. ‘I’m a little low, but that’s okay,’ she said. ‘How are you? It was nice chatting with you at 
the party.’ I guess I should have enquired why she felt low. However, I sidestepped it. ‘Yeah, listen, do you 
have Raghav’s number?’ I said. ‘Of course. How come you want it?’ ‘There’s an article of his I read in the 
paper today, on education. I liked it, wanted to tell him.’ ‘Oh, sure,’ she said. ‘He will be so happy.’ She 
read out the number to me. ‘Thanks, Aarti,’ I said. ‘Speak later then?’ ‘You don’t want to know why I am 
low?’ she said. When a girl asks you that, you’d better say yes. “I do. Why?’ I said. ‘Mom and dad won’t let 
me leave Varanasi,’ she said. ‘Really? How will you fly for an airline then?’ I said. ‘Exactly. What am I 
supposed to become here? A boat hostess?’ ‘Convince them,’ I said, for lack of better advice. ‘They won’t 
listen. I may have to run away.’ ‘Are you crazy? They will come around,’ I said. ‘Will you talk to them?’ she 
said. ‘Me?’ ‘Yeah, why not?’ ‘Who am I? Raghav will be better, no?’ I said. ‘Raghav? He doesn’t even want 
me to go. Plus, he is so busy at the newspaper, he won’t meet me, let alone my parents’ ‘You have no 
other friend? Somebody from the aviation academy?’ I said. ‘Or maybe even your faculty?’
‘You don’t want to do it, is it?’ she said. ‘No, I just... I just don’t think I am the best person to talk to them 
about this.’ ‘Fine,’ she said. ‘Fine’ means somewhere between ‘whatever’ and go to hell’ in Girlese. ‘Okay, 
the site engineer is calling me,’ I lied. ‘I will speak to you later.’ I hung up. I checked the duration of the 
call. I had spoken to her for seven minutes and twenty-two seconds. I felt like calling her again, and 
advising her on how to deal with her parents. Maybe I should have agreed to meet her parents; after all, 
she had chosen me from all the people she knew. I almost pressed re-dial when I checked myself. Only pain 
will come from being close to her. She belongs to Raghav, and there is no place for me in her life, I scolded 
myself. I called Raghav. He picked up the phone immediately. ‘Hi, it’s Gopal,’ I said. ‘Oh, hi,’ he said. 
‘What’s up, buddy? Thanks for coming to the party that day.’ ‘You are welcome. How’s the new job?’ 
‘They are letting me write, even though tame stuff.’ ‘I read your article today. Pretty good.’ ‘You read it? 
Wow. Thanks’ ‘You mentioned GangaTech, thanks for that too.’ ‘Oh, our research team made that table. 
You are about to open, right?’ ‘Yes, almost ready. Would you like to visit? Maybe you can do a story 
specific to GangaTech.’ ‘Yeah, I could,’ Raghav said, his voice hesitant. ‘Though the policy might be to not 
talk about specific institutions’ ‘Oh, in that case, forget it,’ I said. I didn’t want to take a favour from him, 
anyway. ‘But I could do a story on you.’ ‘Me?’ ‘Yeah, a young boy from Varanasi opens a college. It is 
something. And in that interview we can talk about GangaTech’ ‘I am more of an employee,’ I said.
‘MLA Shukla is the real person, right?’ Raghav said. ‘He is a trustee, yes’ ‘And he paid to build the college?’ 
‘Well, he arranged for the funds’ I said. ‘From where?’ Raghav said. I didn’t like his interrogative tone. ‘He 
knows lots of charitable people,’ I said. ‘Anyway, do you want to interview me? Either way is fine.’ ‘Of 
course, I do. When do you want to do it?’ ‘I have an inspection next Friday. After that? Maybe the 
weekend,’ I said. ‘Sure, I will see you. Where? Dainik office?’ ‘No. Come to my office,’ I said. I stressed the 
last two words. I have a huge office now, buddy, I wanted to tell him. ‘Oh, sure. Where’s your campus?’ 
‘Ten kilometres outside the city on the Lucknow Highway. You will see the board on your right.’ I came out 
of the campus building. I examined the three-storey structure. We had to paint it gray in the coming week. 
My phone rang. It was Bedi. ‘Yes, Bedi sir,’ I said. ‘I’ve lined up seven solid faculty members for interviews 
tomorrow. Are you free?’ ‘I have no choice but to be free. I am on the site all day, can you bring them 
here?’ ‘No way. We have to go to their houses. Three other colleges are opening in the area. They all have 
offers. We have to lure them,’ he said. I sighed. Every day brought a new challenge. ‘Fine, I will arrange a 
car from Shukla-ji’s office,’ I said.                                                  ?
We reached Prof MC Shrivastava’s house in Ashok Nagar at eight a.m. sharp, as instructed by the retired 
electrical engineering professor from NIT Allahabad. We had to get someone from NIT, if not an IIT, to be 
the dean. We had almost struck a deal with a retired NIT Bhopal professor. However, he found a better 
offer closer home in Indore. Prof Shrivastava was AICTE gold standard, with over thirty years’ experience. 
Like all things golden, he didn’t come cheap. ‘Two lakhs a month?’ I asked. ‘But we have just started.’ Mrs 
Shrivastava, the professor’s wife, served us tea and poha for breakfast. She joined the negotiations. ‘Sri 
Amma College has made an offer. One and a half lakhs, plus a car with a driver,’ she said. ‘Madam, the 
university we are affiliated to controls our fee,’ I said. ‘Plus, we are new. I don’t know how admissions will 
go.’ ‘Is that our problem?’ Mrs Shrivastava asked, quite correctly. Bedi jumped into the fray. ‘Whatever 
reasonable requirements you have, tell us. We will accommodate,’ he said. ‘But we have a budget,’ I said. 
Shrivastava put his spoon down. ‘Who are you,’ he said to me, ‘the owner’s son?’ ‘I am the owner, Gopal 
Mishra. The college is on my land,’ I said. ‘And Shukla-ji? Doesn’t he decide on this?’ ‘He is a silent trustee,’ 
I said. 'I decide.’ The professor looked at me for a few seconds, surprised at my defiance. ‘Mr Mishra, the 
dean is most important. I know the AICTE people. With me, consider the inspection done,’ Shrivastava 
said. ‘We have a setting in the AICTE too,’ I said, please understand. If I give you a high package, all other 
members of the faculty will demand similar levels’ ‘You don’t have to disclose my salary’ he said. ‘How will 
we keep it hidden? The accounts department will have the details,’ I said. ‘Pay part of it in cash,’ 
Shrivastava said. Silence descended over the table. He had already provided a solution. A more practical 
dean would be hard to find. ‘How much?’ I said.
‘Fifty per cent? Maybe more,’ he suggested. ‘It only saves me taxes. And nobody feels jealous of me. In 
fact, my on-paper salary will be lower than that of the teachers’ ‘We knew we had come to the right place’ 
Bedi said. ‘Fine,’ I said. We settled for a one-lakh-cash-seventy-thousand-cheque package per month. The 
new dean came on board immediately. He offered to help us hire other faculty, for salaries ranging from 
thirty to eighty thousand a month, depending on experience and the degrees they possessed. I'll charge ten 
thousand per hire as search fee, apart from my salary.’ ‘That’s fine. When can you start?’ I said. ‘Anytime,’ 
he said. I will come to campus three days a week.’ ‘Three days?’ I said. ‘You are the dean of the institute. 
How can the college work without you?’ ‘I am the dean, that is why three days. Else, once a week is 
enough,’ he said. ‘What?’ I said. ‘Which faculty goes to teach every day in private colleges? Don’t worry, I 
will tell the AICTE inspectors I am there every day.’ ‘But who will manage the faculty? Who will ensure that 
classes are held on time and the students are taught properly?’ I said, my heart beating fast. I didn’t know 
if this was how a college dean should be. ‘It’s a private college. We will manage. Tell him, Bedi-ji, how it 
works,’ Shrivastava grinned. Bedi finished his cup of tea and nodded. ‘Of course. We will figure out the 
teaching arrangements and all later. Right now our focus is the inspection, and then the admissions. Later 
on, senior students can teach first-year students. Happens in many colleges’ Mrs Shrivastava cleared the 
table. We moved to the drawing room. 'Whats your admission strategy?’ Shrivastava said. ‘We are 
advertising in all newspapers. Participating in career fairs, also approaching schools and coaching classes,’ 
I said. 'Approaching schools for what?’ he asked. ‘We’ll go to schools and make a presentation on our 
college,’ I said. ‘Who cares about the presentation? Did you fix the principals?’ Shrivastava said.
‘We will, don’t worry,’ Bedi said. ‘We will what?’ I said. I hated it when Bedi didn’t tell me things 
beforehand. ‘I will explain to you. Let’s go, we have other meetings,’ Bedi said and stood up. ‘Thanks, sir, 
will see you on Friday.’ Shrivastava came to see us off at the door. ‘When do I get my first salary?’ he said. 
‘I will send the cash home,’ I said. We had five more faculty prospects to meet. Shukla-ji had given us an 
Innova car for exclusive use of the college. We proceeded to Mughal Sarai to meet a retired chemical 
engineering professor. ‘I am so relieved the dean is done,’ Bedi said as the car reached the highway. ‘He 
seemed more Mr Deal than Mr Dean to me,’ I quipped. ‘He has worked in private colleges before. He 
knows he is in demand. Don’t take his tantrums personally,’ Bedi said. ‘What did he mean by “fix” the 
school principals?’ I said. ‘The schools have a big influence on where the child goes next. Many try for an 
IIT and NIT, most don’t make it. Where do they go?’ ‘Where?’ I said. ‘That’s where we come in. Private 
colleges can fulfil your dream of becoming an engineer, even if you didn’t clear the entrance exam. The 
problem is, there are so many private colleges now. How does the student choose?’ I asked the driver to 
increase the temperature of the air-conditioner, to beat the forty degrees outside. ‘How?’ I said. ‘They go 
with the school teachers’ and principals’ advice. Who else can they trust?’ ‘True,’ I said. ‘So, we ask the 
principal to recommend our college?’ ‘Exactly! You are smart,’ Bedi said, probably in sarcasm. ‘Do we 
bribe them too?’ 1 said. ‘Yes. But never say that word, especially to school principals. Anyway, it is a 
straightforward calculation. We give them ten per cent of the fee we take for every admission.’ A defined 
sum doesn’t sound like a bribe.
‘We give ten per cent to anyone - coaching classes, career fair organisers or whoever helps us fill up the 
college.’ ‘Ten per cent it is,’ I said. ‘You are working on the media plan, right?’ he said. My thoughts went 
to our media strategy, then to Raghav, and from there to Aarti. It is amazing how the brain will connect 
one thought to another until it gets to where it wants to be. Bedi continued to talk about how we will fill 
two hundred students for the first batch. I tuned out, looking at the fields outside and remembering Aarti’s 
flowing hair as she took a sip from my drink in Raghav’s balcony. Life is a bitch when the only woman you 
can think of belongs to someone else. I saw Raghav enter the campus from the window of my office. I had 
screamed at the carpenters to get my office desk and chairs finished in time. Apart from the missing 
visitors’ sofa, my office had become functional. The air-conditioner worked. I increased the cooling to 
maximum to ensure Raghav noticed it. I surrounded myself with files. He came and knocked on the half-
open door. ‘Yes?’ I said and looked up. ‘We did say two o’ clock, right?’ Raghav said. He wore a white shirt 
and blue jeans. ‘Hi, Raghav. Sorry, I keep so busy, I lose track of time sometimes,’ I said. He sat across me. 
I sat on the director’s chair. I wondered if he noticed how I had a far more plush chair than his. He took out 
his notepad, pen and a few printouts. ‘I did some research, whatever I could find on the college.’ ‘You 
won’t find much. We are new,’ I said. ‘Yes, but I found a lot on one of the trustees, Shukla.’ ‘Of course, he 
is a popular politician. But he isn’t really involved in the functioning of the college.’ ‘He’s involved in many 
other things though.’ Raghav smoothed out the printout with the questions. ‘Tea?’ I said. He nodded. I 
rang the bell. I had asked the peon to bring tea in the bone china cups we kept for special guests. Not that 
Raghav counted as special. However, I wanted him to know we had tea in fancy cups. He looked around 
the huge twenty-by-eighteen-feet office. I wanted to ask him if anyone in his newspaper had such a big 
office, but controlled myself.
He noticed an architects model of the campus behind me. ‘Can I take a look?’ he said. ‘Sure,’ I said and 
jumped up. ‘Let me show you all the facilities’ I explained the campus layout to him. ‘The hostels are here. 
We will keep adding more rooms with successive batches. The classrooms and faculty offices are here, in 
the main building we are in right now. The labs are in a separate building. All imported equipment.’ ‘What 
will be the faculty ratio?’ Raghav said, taking frantic notes. ‘We are targeting no more than one teacher 
per fifteen students,’ I said, ‘which is better than the AICTE norms. One day we want to be better than 
BHU.’ He looked at me. ‘Just as a goal. Who else is there to compare with?’ I said. He shrugged his 
shoulders in support. The tea arrived. I had instructed the peon to serve at least five snacks. He brought 
nuts, biscuits, samosas, potato chips and cut fruits. ‘That’s not tea. That’s a meal,’ Raghav said. ‘Please 
have. We can continue the interview later,’ I said as the peon served us. We ate in silence. I didn’t want to 
discuss anything other than the college with him. He picked up his notepad as he ate. ‘What kind of 
investment went into this college?’ he said. ‘Lots. Engineering colleges aren’t cheap,’ I said and laughed, 
avoiding any real figures. ‘How much exactly?’ he said. ‘Hard to say. I had the land, but if you had to buy it, 
you can imagine the prices,’ I said. ‘Isn’t this agricultural land?’ he said. ‘Yes, you know that, Raghav. 
Remember Baba’s court case?’ ‘You managed to get it from your relatives?’ he said. ‘Yes, but that’s not 
going into the interview, right?’ I said. ‘No. But tell me, how did this agricultural land get re-zoned?’ ‘We 
applied, the VNN approved,’ I said.
He continued to take notes. ‘Everything is approved,’ I repeated, perhaps too defensively. ‘Because of 
Shukla?’ he asked. ‘No,’ I said, somewhat irritated. ‘Because we followed procedures’ ‘Fine. How much did 
the college cost apart from the land?’ he said. ‘I am not sure if I can reveal that. It is, after all, competitive 
information. But anyone who visits our campus can see it is state of the art,’ I said. ‘More than five 
crores?’ he persisted. I shouldn’t have entered his guessing game. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘More than ten?’ he said. 
‘How is the actual number relevant?’ I said. ‘Where did the money come from?’ he said. ‘From the trustees 
and their associates.’ ‘Whose associates? Yours or Shukla’s?’ he said. ‘I gave the land. Shukla-ji arranged 
for the funds, for the benefit of this town. We are a non-profit trust,’ I said. ‘Do you know where the MLA 
arranged the funds from?’ Raghav asked, without looking up from his diary. ‘No. And I don’t see why I 
should know. It is his and his friends’ private wealth.’ ‘Are you aware of Shukla’s involvement in the Ganga 
Action Plan scam?’ he said. ‘No, Raghav. I don’t want to comment on anything other than GangaTech. If 
you have all the information, we can end the interview.’ Raghav put away his pen. ‘I’m sorry. Yes, I am 
done. Don’t worry, I will do a balanced piece.’ ‘Thanks, I will see you out.’ We walked together to the 
campus gate. He had come on an old scooter that belonged to his dad. ‘I could have sent my car to pick 
you up,’ I said. ‘It is too hot.’
‘It’s fine. I have to go to many places,’ he said and put his helmet on. ‘Do you miss engineering?’ I said, my 
first general question to him. ‘Not really. Never became one, I guess,’ he said. I felt the time was right to 
deliver my final punch. ‘You are from BHU. You’d look great on our faculty list. Want to join?’ I said. Yes, I 
could hire him. BHU may not have taken me, but I could take their graduates. ‘Me? Faculty? No way. 
Besides, I have a job,’ he said and sat on the scooter. ‘You don’t have to come much. Help me with the 
inspections, and maybe come once a week,’ I said. He was about to start his scooter, but stopped midway. 
He mulled over my words. ‘We pay well. Maybe more than your newspaper,’ I added. He smiled and shook 
his head. ‘Why not?’ I said, irked by his easy rejection. ‘I can’t be part of a corrupt enterprise,’ he said. 
‘What? ‘It is Shukla’s college.’ ‘It is mine,’ I protested. ‘I know you will run it, but he is behind it, right?’ ‘So? 
How can you call us corrupt? We haven’t even opened yet.’ ‘It’s built with money made by corrupt 
practices’ ‘I have worked my ass off for three years, Raghav. Three years, Sundays included. How can you 
make a statement like that?’ ‘He is accused of stealing twenty crores from the Ganga Action Plan. 
Government money meant to clean our river.’ ‘It is an accusation. Not proven,’ I said. ‘Right after that he 
made many property investments, including this college. Can’t believe you didn’t see through it. How can a 
politician have so much money? He comes from a humble background.’ ‘Can you prove wrongdoing?’ I 
said.
‘Not yet. But are you sure he didn’t do anything?’ he queried. I couldn’t control myself anymore. ‘You are 
jealous,’ I said. ‘What?’ ‘You are jealous that I am doing well. I am not supposed to do well, right? After all, 
my AIEEE rank was lower than yours. Isn’t it, Mr JEE?’ ‘Easy, buddy. This is not personal,’ he said and kick-
started his scooter. ‘Then what is it, Mr Reporter?’ ‘It’s my job to figure out the truth, that’s all.’ Before I 
could respond, he zoomed off. He left behind a cloud of dust that stung my eyes more than anything ever 
had in the past year.                                                          ? The day of the AICTE inspection felt like an exam 
day. Our faculty of twenty reached the campus at 8:00 a.m. Sweepers scrubbed the floors till the last 
minute. The IT specialist ensured that the desktops in the computer room worked. We had arranged a 
dinner at Taj Ganga for the inspection committee. Shukla-ji had promised me he’d come, but backed out at 
the last minute due to an urgent rural visit. Sweat beads formed on my forehead. I made the fifth trip to 
the campus gate to check if the inspectors had arrived yet. ‘Stand straight,’ I hollered at the security guard, 
‘and salute all guests.’ ‘Relax, Director Gopal,’ Dean Shrivastava said, ‘I will handle them.’ They arrived 
only at eleven. Ashok Sharma, our junior-most faculty member, waited with bouquets at the main building 
entrance. The head of the inspection committee shook my hand. ‘I am Jhule Yadav, ex-professor from NIT 
Delhi.’ ‘I am Gopal Mishra, promoter and director of the college. Meet Dean Shrivastava, ex-director of 
NIT Allahabad,’ I said. Yadav and Shrivastava exchanged glances, sizing each other up like boxers in a ring. 
We walked to my office and sat down on the new sofas that smelt of varnish. ‘NIT Allahabad?’ Yadav 
asked. ‘You had a Barua in Electrical? He went to Stanford later.’ ‘Yes’ Shrivastava said, ‘I hired him.’ 
‘Barua was my student’ Yadav said and slapped his thigh.
Suddenly the lights went out. Everyone sighed as darkness engulfed us. We had power supply issues in the 
nearby villages. We had no electricity for six hours every afternoon. ‘We have a generator,’ I said, and 
went to tell the peon to switch it on. The office was turning stuffy. ‘Should we go outside?’ said one 
middle-aged member of the inspection team. ‘Any minute now, sir,’ I said. The tube-light in my office 
blinked as power came back on. ‘How many lathe machines are there in your machining lab?’ asked an 
inspector. ‘Eight,’ Shrivastava said. ‘We will take a round later.’ ‘Shrivastava sir, why walk around in the 
heat?’ Yadav said. ‘Your team member asked a question, sir,’ Shrivastava said. Everyone turned to the 
inspector who had asked the lathe machine question. ‘You are?’ Shrivastava said. ‘Mr Bhansali,’ said the 
inspector. ‘Mr Bhansali, why don’t we all move to my office for course-related questions? Unless you need 
the promoter.’ ‘You look young,’ Bhansali said to me. ‘I am young,’ I said. ‘What are your qualifications?’ 
he said. ‘I have built this college,’ I said, ‘and I have hired the best faculty.’ ‘But...’ Bhansali said as 
Shrivastava cut him. ‘Let’s go, sir. I will answer everything,’ Shrivastava said and escorted them out. When 
everyone was out, Shrivastava came back into my office. ‘Bhansali is new. The other six won’t say a word. 
Lunch is coming, right?’ ‘Yes, the caterer is already here,’ I said. ‘Good. And the packets?’
‘Packets?’ ‘Gopal, do I have to explain it? This is AICTE.’ ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘You mean the envelopes. Of course, I 
have them ready.’ ‘Good. Give it to them after dessert. How much?’ ‘Two for Yadav, and twenty-five each 
for the rest?’ I said. ‘Make it fifty for Bhansali,’ Shrivastava said. ‘What’s for dessert?’ ‘Moong daal halwa,’ 
I said. ‘My favourite!’ Prof Shrivastava said and left.                                                               ? We had booked a 
private room in Taj Ganga for the AICTE inspection dinner. We had also invited our entire faculty and 
senior government officials who had helped us in the past. They came with families. This party of a 
hundred people burnt another hole in GangaTech’s pocket. We hadn’t earned a rupee of revenue yet. We 
had spent six crores already on construction, equipment, faculty, and of course, fixing government 
officials. However, Shukla-ji didn’t seem to care. ‘Relax, we will recover the money,’ Shukla-ji said. He 
handed me a whisky with soda. I scanned the room. ‘We have paid bribes to at least thirty people in this 
room,’ I said. Shukla-ji laughed. ‘What have we done wrong? We only wanted to open a college,’ I said. 
‘It’s okay,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘If we had a straightforward and clean system, these professors would open their 
own colleges. Blue-chip companies and software firms could open colleges. The system is twisted, they 
don’t want to touch it. That is where we come in’ ‘When will we make money? I paid five lakhs today for 
the inspection.’ ‘Pay them some more,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Who?’ ‘The inspectors’
‘Why?’ I said. ‘Shrivastava sir said it is enough. We will get the approval in a week.’ ‘I want them to not 
only clear the college, but also say great things about GangaTech,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘In writing?’ I said. ‘Yes, 
which we will use for marketing. Ten thousand more to the minions, fifty more to the main guy. I’ll arrange 
the cash.’ He took out his phone and made a call. Shukla-ji and I went to the dinner buffet. We filled our 
plates with food, and came to one corner of the room. ‘The cash will arrive in an hour,’ he told me. ‘Why 
do you trust me so much, Shukla-ji. I could steal your money.’ ‘You don’t have a family. Whom would you 
steal for?’ he said. The AICTE approval came on time, as promised by Prof Shrivastava. We had one final 
step before we opened for admissions. We needed the state university affiliation. Mangesh Tiwari, the 
vicechancellor, had sat on our application for months. We were at Shukla-ji’s place. ‘Affiliation is a simple 
job. We are offering him double the market rate. Mangesh is turning senile,’ Bedi said. ‘How much does he 
want?’ Shukla-ji asked. ‘It’s not about the money. He doesn’t like us. Doesn’t even take our calls’ Bedi said. 
‘What is the solution?’ I said. ‘Use some contacts. Non-political if possible, he is a college batchmate of 
our DM,’ Bedi said. ‘I know the DM’s daughter. Old school friend,’ I said. ‘Well, do whatever it takes. I 
want admissions to open next week. Full-page ads in every paper,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Don’t worry, next Sunday 
Varanasi will talk only about GangaTech,’ I said.                                                            ? I had promised myself 
not to call Aarti. However, I had no choice. ‘Look who’s calling today!’ Aarti chirped. ‘You sound happy,’ I 
said.
‘Do I? Maybe because you called. I don’t really have another reason.’ ‘Why? What happened?’ I said. 
‘Nothing. I have to find a job in Varanasi.’ ‘That’s not so bad.’ ‘Will your college have its own plane?’ she 
said. ‘Not yet,’ I said. ‘But if we do, we will make you cabin supervisor.’ She laughed. ‘How are you? When 
will your college actually have students?’ ‘When we manage to please every Indian government official on 
this earth,’ I said. ‘Actually, I had called for some work.’ ‘What?’ she said. ‘I wanted to meet your dad.’ 
‘Really? How come?’ ‘We need some help in getting through to the state university’ ‘You want to speak to 
him now?’ ‘No, I’d prefer to meet him face to face,’ I said. ‘Would you like to meet me face to face?’ she 
said. ‘Or am I still  on the blacklist? To be called only in work emergencies’ ‘Nothing like that. We can catch 
up after I meet your dad.’ ‘Of course, work first,’ she said in a sarcastic tone. ‘My admissions are stuck, 
Aarti. It’s urgent,’ I said. ‘Okay, okay, fine. Hold on a second, let me check with him,’ she said. She spoke to 
her father and picked up the phone again. ‘Tomorrow morning at eight?’ ‘Sure,’ I said. ‘I will see you then.’                                                               
? ‘You never come home now. Not friends with Aarti anymore?’ DM Pradhan said.
We sat in his study. A lifesize portrait of Aarti’s grandfather, ex-CM Brij Pradhan, stared at me from the 
wall. DM Pradhan - broad faced with chiselled features, fit and proud - sipped coffee with me. ‘Nothing like 
that, Uncle. Work keeps me busy,’ I said. ‘I have heard about your college. Shukla-ji’s involed in it, right?’ 
DM Pradhan said. ‘Yes, and now we are one step away from admissions’ I said and explained the problem 
with VC Tiwari. He heard me out and then said, ‘Let me see.’ He took out his cellphone and called the VC. 
‘Tiwari sir? Hello, Pratap Pradhan here ... Yes, long time. How are you?’ Aarti’s father fixed a meeting 
between us and Tiwari in the afternoon. ‘Thank you so much,’ I said, preparing to leave. ‘You are 
welcome. Listen, have you paid Tiwari?’ I felt awkward discussing such issues with Aarti’s dad, so I kept 
quiet. ‘I know how the education business works. Tiwari talks intellectual, but he wants his share. I hope 
you guys won’t get me involved with that.’ ‘Not at all, sir,’ I said. ‘Even I don’t deal with that stuff. I only 
look after the college’ ‘So all such work is done by Shukla-ji’s men?’ Aarti’s father asked. ‘Yes,’ 1 said as I 
gazed at the floor.
‘Good, you are like me then,’ he said. ‘Practical enough to leave the people who do the funny stuff alone.’ 
I nodded and bowed to him before I left his room.                                                   ? ‘One chocolate milk shake 
with ice cream, please,’ Aarti said. We had come to the same CCD in Sigra where Sunil had brought me 
after the career fair debacle. ‘Black tea,’ I said. She wore a mauve chikan salwar-kameez. Her father had 
bought it for her from Lucknow. She removed her white dupatta and kept it aside. The waiter placed her 
milk shake on the table. She put her lips to the straw, without touching the overflowing glass with her 
hands. ‘I often spill this. I better be careful,’ she said. Wisps of her hair brushed the table as she sipped her 
drink. The entire cafe checked her out. ‘We should totally do this more often,’ she said, coffee meetings. 
Even though neither of us is having coffee.’ ‘I don’t think so’ I said. ‘Why? You don’t like meeting me?’ she 
said. ‘So much for being my best friend for over ten years!’ ‘Raghav won’t appreciate it,’ I said. ‘What is 
wrong in meeting for coffee? Besides, Raghav is too busy to be bothered by such things.’ ‘Of course, big 
reporter now. I met him,’ I said as I lifted my cup. ‘You did,’ she said, still sipping her milk shake as her 
eyebrows shot up. ‘He interviewed me, for his paper.’ ‘What for?’ she said. ‘Local boy starts college.’ ‘It’s 
true. Quite an achievement.’ ‘Yeah, for a loser like me.’ ‘I didn’t say that,’ she said. ‘Hey, you’d like 
something to eat?’ Before I could answer she ordered two chocolate chip muffins. If Aarti had a choice, 
there would be
nothing but chocolate to eat in the world. ‘How’s your job-hunt going?’ I said. ‘I have an offer. I am not 
sure I want to take it.’ ‘Really? What is the offer?’ ‘Guest relations trainee, Ramada Hotel. They are 
opening up in Cantonment.’ ‘Five-star, isn’t it?’ ‘Yeah, they came to meet dad for some work. Dad found 
out about the vacancy, I applied and now they want me to start next month.’ ‘Go for it. I know you, you 
can’t sit at home ’ I said. ‘You know me better than most people, Gopal,’ she said, ‘but...’ ‘What?’ I said. 
The muffins arrived but she didn’t touch them. I noticed her eyes. They had turned moist. A tear trickled 
down her cheek. ‘Aarti, are you okay?’ I passed her a tissue. She wiped her eyes and returned the eyeliner-
stained tissue to me. ‘Once I join, my parents will say this is a good job, close to home, stay here. If I sulk 
at home, maybe they will let me try for some airline.’ I scoffed at her. ‘What is the need to cry for this? 
You’ve got a good job. You have done a course in hospitality ...’ ‘Aviation, not hospitality.’ ‘Fine, but a 
flight attendant also serves guests, like hotel staff. And a guest relations trainee has better scope for 
growth. Trainee today, officer tomorrow, maybe GM of the hotel some day. You are smart. You will rise.’ 
She sniffed a few times to control herself. ‘You think so?’ she said, her eyes even more beautiful when 
glistening with tears. I couldn’t respond, so lost was I in the details of her face. ‘What? Did the eyeliner 
spread?’ she laughed. ‘I am so stupid, crying away like a baby.’ ‘No, you are not. You wouldn’t have got 
the job otherwise,’ I said. ‘Should I take it?’ ‘Why not? Quit if you don’t like it. What does Raghav say?’ 
‘Nothing.’
‘Meaning?’ ‘I haven’t met him since the offer. I called him, but he said I should do whatever I want. He is in 
some village this week for a story.’ ‘It’s good for both of you if you stay here,’ I said. ‘Well, he didn’t say 
that at all.’ ‘I am sure he realises it.’ ‘I don’t think he cares so much about my issues, unless I am involved in 
a corruption scandal,’ she said. I smiled like she had intended me to. I asked for the bill. ‘So, coffee 
friends?’ ‘We are friends,’ I said. ‘Cool. It’s not officially open, but I will show you the hotel sometime. It’s 
pretty grand.’ ‘Sure,’ I said. ‘When can I see GangaTech?’ she said. ‘Two more weeks,’ I said, ‘I promise. 
It’s almost done.’ We walked to her car. ‘I laughed, I cried. It is so nice to meet you,’ Aarti said. ‘Same 
here, I didn’t cry though,’ I said. She laughed again. She hugged me and held me slightly longer than usual. 
‘Old friends are old friends, Gopal. Boyfriends and all are fine, but they never understand you like old 
friends can.’ I hated the word ‘friends’ but didn’t say anything, just waved goodbye. My phone rang. Bedi. 
‘The VC has called us for a meeting. The phone call from the DM worked. They know each other from 
childhood,’ he said. ‘Old friends are old friends’ I said.
For GangaTech’s opening I wore a suit for the first time in my life. I supervised the decorations. We slept in 
my office the night before. We had turned three classrooms into admission centres. I stayed up to ensure 
we had forms, pens and information booklets. Shukla-ji had gone all out too. He had managed to convince 
the Chief Minister to come and inaugurate the college. Two state ministers would accompany him. The 
security officials of the politicians had already visited us the day before. Since we didn’t have an auditorium 
yet, we had erected a makeshift podium inside a tent for the speeches. ‘Two thousand invites sent, sir, to 
all prominent families in Varanasi,’ Ajay, from the chemical engineering faculty, told me. We had promised 
lunch. Hence, we expected at least half of the invitees to turn up. Given the distance, we had arranged four 
buses for the general public, and a dozen cars to ferry the media to and fro. I had spent ten lakhs on full-
page ads in leading city newspapers, three days in a row. You only get one shot at a launch. Shukla-ji 
wanted the city to know he had built an institution. Work ended at 5:30 a.m. I lay down on the office sofa 
for a power nap before the function. Shukla-ji’s call woke me up at six-thirty. I rubbed my eyes, 
disoriented. ‘Good morning, Shukla-ji,’ I said. ‘Didyou see the newspaper?’ I realised he must have seen the 
full-page ads and called in excitement. After years of waiting, finally the day had come. ‘No, I am in 
campus. The paper hasn’t arrived yet,’ I said. ‘How did this happen?’ Shukla-ji said. I wondered why he 
didn’t sound happy. Maybe he is not a morning person, I thought. ‘The ads look nice, don’t they?’ ‘Not the 
ads, you idiot. I am talking about the article in Dainik.’ Shukla-ji had never called me names before. Sure, I 
worked for him. But he had never raised his voice at me until now. ‘What article?’ I said, my hand going to 
my sleep-deprived, throbbing temples. ‘Read the paper and call me.’ ‘Okay. How do the ads look?’ I only 
heard a click in response. I shouted for the peon and asked him to fetch all the newspapers. In an hour I 
had them on my desk.
Every paper had our full-page colour ad. The campus photograph looked beautiful. I saw my name at the 
bottom of the ad. Shukla-ji’s harsh words rang in my head. I flipped through Dainik. On page six I found the 
article. The headline said: ‘New engineering college opens in city - with corruption money?’ ‘What the 
fuck!’ I said to myself as I read further. Raghav Kashyap, Staff Reporter I couldn’t believe he had done this. 
The first few lines seemed harmless. The city of Varanasi, also called the City of Learning, can boast of 
another engineering college of its own. The GangaTech College of Engineering, set in a fifteen-acre 
campus on the Lucknow Highway, opens its gates for admissions this weekend. Raghav had indeed 
mentioned the facilities we offered, the faculty profile, the branches of engineering available and the 
selection process. The halfpage article also carried a picture of Shuklaji and me. I had never seen my 
picture in a newspaper. However, I couldn’t savour the moment as I continued to read the article. 
Interestingly, MLA Raman Lal Shukla is one of the trustees of GangaTech, He has helped fund the college. 
Shukla also owns land around the GangaTech campus, estimated to cost between five and ten crores. 
Where did Shukla obtain these funds from? Incidentally, he floated the college three years ago, around the 
same time that his name came up in the Ganga Action Plan scam. Is this college an attempt to clean up his 
reputation? People come to the Ganga to clean their sins. Is Shukla trying to clean away his sins against 
Ganga? ‘Fuck you,’ I said as I finished the article. I crumpled the newspaper. This could not be happening to 
us. Not on the day of admissions. Not on any day. Shukla-ji called again. I hesitated but picked up. ‘I saw 
it,’ I said. ‘How the hell did this happen? Who is this behenchod reporter Raghav? He really interviewed 
you?’ ‘He is my ... f... friend ... from school,’ I said, stammering. ‘He had promised a balanced piece.’ ‘This 
is balanced? He has shoved it up my ass’ ‘I am really sorry, Shukla-ji. Don’t worry, other papers don’t have 
this story.’ ‘Dainik is the biggest and most influential. The CM has already cancelled his visit.’
‘What?’ I said, shocked. ‘Who will inaugurate the college? We have a stone plaque in his name.’ ‘I don’t 
know. The peon can inaugurate it for all I care,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Please be calm, Shukla-ji,’ I said. ‘Really, we 
have to find someone in the next three hours.’ The MLA took a deep breath. ‘The state minister for 
education is still coming. He can inaugurate it.’ ‘And the plaque?’ ‘Put a sticker on it, Gopal. Do I have to 
tell you everything?’ ‘Sorry, Shukla-ji, I will fix it,’ I said. I began a round of follow-ups. Most of the invitees 
confirmed their presence. A free lunch beats corruption allegations any day. ‘May I come in, sir?’ I heard a 
female voice as I finished a call. I looked up. ‘Aarti!’ ‘Am I disturbing you?’ she said. ‘I am early.’ She had 
come at nine, an hour before the scheduled inauguration. Even in my stressed state, 1 noticed she had 
dressed up for the occasion. She wore a bottle green salwar-kameez with a purple and gold border. I 
continued to stare at her, my mouth half open. ‘May I come in, Director sir?’ she said. ‘Huh? Yeah, of 
course,’ I said. ‘Wow, you look ...’ ‘What?’ she said. ‘You look so formal,’ I said. Stunning, is what I wanted 
to say. ‘Oh, I thought you might say I look nice.’ ‘That’s obvious, Aarti.’ ‘What’s obvious?’ ‘You always look 
good,’ I said. ‘Yeah? I don’t hear that so much these days’ ‘Why? Your boyfriend doesn’t say it?’ I asked 
with a sting in my voice, thoughts of Raghav’s article not leaving my head.
She sighed. ‘Unless I dress up in newsprint I don’t think he would notice.’ I smiled. And started to check the 
list of school principals to see if I had missed anyone. ‘You seem busy,’ Aarti said. ‘Should I wait outside?’ I 
would have never let Aarti go, but I had tons of calls to make. ‘Will you be okay outside?’ I said. ‘Yes, mom 
is here. Dad couldn’t come. He is on tour.’ ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘Let me wish her at least.’ We walked outside. Her 
mother was sitting in the front row, one of the first guests in the tent. ‘Hello, aunty,’ I said, my hands 
folded. ‘Congratulations, Gopal. What a lovely campus,’ she said. ‘Why don’t you make us your media 
partner?’ he said. ‘What’s that?’ I said. ‘For a little extra fee we publish positive articles about your college. 
We get news, you get an image. It is a win-win partnership,’ he said. ‘How do I know they will be positive?’ 
I said. Once bitten, twice shy. ‘You send us the articles,’ Amar said. I asked him to send me a formal 
proposal. After Varanasi Times, I went to Bansphatak to visit the Dainik office. ‘Welcome Gopal-ji,’ Sailesh 
Gupta, the sales manager at Dainik, greeted me at the building entrance. I flashed him a curt smile. We 
went to his office. ‘What will you have, sir?’ he said. I shook my head. ‘Tea? Coffee??’ ‘Articles full of lies?’ 
I said. ‘What?’ he said. ‘Sailesh, I signed you the biggest cheque among all the places we advertised in. And 
what did you
do? On the day of our launch?’ Sailesh understood my context and shifted his gaze. ‘I have five lakhs more 
to spend next week. Tell me why I should not make Varanasi Times happy and give them this?’ I waved the 
trust’s chequebook at him. ‘Gopal bhai,’ Sailesh said in a low voice, ‘what are you saying? We are the 
number one newspaper.’ ‘So? You fuck us?’ ‘Gopal bhai, I didn’t do it.’ ‘College made with corrupt money! 
You have made money from us too.’ ‘It is the editorial. They are stupid, impractical people,’ Sailesh said. I 
banged my fist on the table. ‘I want to meet your editor-in-chief. If you want me to book any ads after 
this,’ I said. Sailesh glanced at my chequebook. He stood up. ‘Let’s go,’ he said. I followed him to the 
editorial floor. ‘It’s still under construction’ I said, gesturing at a waiter to bring tea and snacks. ‘Don’t 
worry about us,’ Aarti said. ‘You do your function. Attend to all the high-profile guests’ She hugged me 
before I left. I noticed her mother’s eyes on me. I folded my hands once more and excused myself.                                                               
? The inauguration ceremony went off smoothly, though without the CM the event lost some of its sheen. 
The state education minister unveiled the college plaque, his name stuck over the CM’s on the black 
granite stone. There were murmurs among the media members regarding the CM’s absence. ‘The CM had 
to cancel in the last minute due to a crisis,’ Shukla-ji said as he came on stage. He kept his speech to less 
than a minute. The press scrambled to ask questions. They all wanted to talk about the Dainik article. 
However, the MLA dodged them all from podium to gate. ‘My apologies, no questions today. I have to visit 
villages. The farmers need me. Mr Gopal Mishra will take it from here.’
Within minutes, he had left the campus in his car. He called me from the highway. ‘I want to speak to the 
bloody editor of Dainik’, he said. ‘Sure, I will set it up,’ I said. ‘By the way, the admission forms are going 
well.’ ‘Do the bastards know how many ads we give them?’ he went on. ‘Shukla-ji, on the admissions ...’ I 
said. But he had already cut the call.                                                       ? We hoped to fill the remaining seats 
with an ad campaign. ‘We want to advertise all year,’ I told the marketing head of Varanasi Times. ‘We 
expect a bigger discount.’ I had spent the whole day doing the rounds of newspapers to book more ads. I 
sat in the office of Amar Trivedi, marketing head of Varanasi Times. ‘Why don’t you make us your media 
partner?’ he said. ‘What’s that?’ I said. ‘For a little extra fee we publish positive articles about your college. 
We get news, you get an image. It is a win-win partnership,’ he said. ‘How do I know they will be positive?’ 
I said. Once bitten, twice shy. ‘You send us the articles,’ Amar said. I asked him to send me a formal 
proposal. After Varanasi Times, I went to Bansphatak to visit the Dainik office. ‘Welcome Gopal-ji,’ Sailesh 
Gupta, the sales manager at Dainik, greeted me at the building entrance. I flashed him a curt smile. We 
went to his office. ‘What will you have, sir?’ he said. I shook my head. ‘Tea? Coffee??’ ‘Articles full of lies?’ 
I said. ‘What?’ he said.
‘Sailesh, I signed you the biggest cheque among all the places we advertised in. And what did you do? On 
the day of our launch?’ Sailesh understood my context and shifted his gaze. ‘I have five lakhs more to 
spend next week. Tell me why I should not make Varanasi Times happy and give them this?’ I waved the 
trust’s chequebook at him. ‘Gopal bhai,’ Sailesh said in a low voice, ‘what are you saying? We are the 
number one newspaper.’ ‘So? You fuck us?’ ‘Gopal bhai, I didn’t do it.’ ‘College made with corrupt money! 
You have made money from us too.’ ‘It is the editorial. They are stupid, impractical people,’ Sailesh said. I 
banged my fist on the table. ‘I want to meet your editor-in-chief. If you want me to book any ads after 
this,’ I said. Sailesh glanced at my chequebook. He stood up. ‘Let’s go,’ he said. I followed him to the 
editorial floor. In his glass cabin, Ashok Kumar, the editor-in-chief, was in a meeting with some sub-editors. 
Sailesh went in, the sub-editors came out. Sailesh signalled for me to enter. Ashok scanned me from tip to 
toe. ‘You are from MLA Shukla’s office?’ he said. ‘I am the director of GangaTech College,’ I said and 
offered my hand. He shook it in a cursory manner and asked me to sit down. ‘I saw the full-page ads,’ 
Ashok began, looking a bit puzzled about my presence in his cabin. ‘Did you see the article you did on us?’ I 
said. ‘I am sure I must have. Who did it?’ Ashok said. He put on his spectacles and turned to his computer 
to search. ‘Sir may not remember the reporter,’ Sailesh told me. ‘Should we search by date?’ ‘Raghav 
Kashyap wrote it,’ I said. ‘The new hire?’ Ashok said, upbeat for the first time. He quickly located the article 
on his computer. He turned the monitor towards us. ‘This one?’
I nodded. ‘I must congratulate the reporter. He’s new, yet his stories are getting noticed.’ ‘If you write 
nonsense you will get noticed,’ I said. ‘What happened Sailesh-ji. Why is your client so upset? We have 
done a half-page profile on their college,’ Ashok said. ‘Why the last two paras? And the headline?’ I butted 
in. ‘What?’ Ashok said and skimmed the article again. ‘Oh, the corruption stuff. What is the big deal in 
that?’ ‘It affects our image,’ I said, bringing down both my palms forcefully on the table. Ashok didn’t 
appreciate my display of emotion. He stared at me. I removed my hands from the table. ‘If you are so 
concerned about image, why did you open a college with MLA Shukla?’ Ashok said. Sailesh realised this 
wasn’t going well. ‘Sir, GangaTech is expected to be our biggest account,’ Sailesh said. ‘So, we should stop 
reporting news in a fair manner?’ Ashok said. ‘The allegations have not been proved,’ I said. ‘A three-year-
old dead issue is brought out on the day of the opening. Is that fair?’ ‘Ashok sir, let’s talk in private for two 
minutes,’ Sailesh said. I stood outside the office as they spoke. I looked around. I asked a peon where 
Raghav Kashyap sat. I saw his tiny cubicle. It occupied less space than the sofa in my office. I saw Raghav. 
He was typing furiously on his computer, unaware of the world around him. Sailesh called me back in. 
‘Don’t worry, it is all settled. Ashok sir will speak to the MLA directly. We will sort it out. Please, let’s 
continue our association,’ Sailesh said. ‘Okay,’ I said. ‘What about the reporter?’ ‘What about him?’ 
Sailesh said. ‘He is a trainee.’ ‘I want him to apologise to me’ I said. Sailesh looked at Ashok. ‘That’s up to 
him,’ Ashok said. He picked up the phone and asked his secretary to send Raghav in.
Five minutes later, Raghav knocked on the door. ‘Sir, you called me?’ Raghav said, then saw me. ‘Hey, 
Gopal. You here?’ ‘You guys know each other?’ Ashok said, one eyebrow raised. ‘He interviewed me,’ I 
said. Raghav seemed surprised by my terse statement. He realised I didn’t want to establish any prior 
connection. ‘What’s the matter?’ Raghav said, as he noticed the serious mood in the room. Sailesh 
recounted our earlier discussion. ‘Apologise?’ Raghav said. ‘Gopal, you want me to apologise to you?’ ‘Do 
you guys know each other from before?’ Ashok said, catching on to the undercurrents. ‘We went to the 
same school,’ I said. ‘And sat at the same desk. Close friends,’ Raghav said. ‘Why don’t you tell them that?’ 
Why don’t I tell them you took my girl, you asshole, I wanted to say. Or that you are so jealous of my 
success that you planted a stinker article? ‘These corruption allegations are unfounded. And there is no 
need to mention them in a college profile,’ I said. ‘I had to be balanced,’ Raghav said. ‘Shukla is a known 
crook.’ ‘Nonsense,’ I said, my voice loud. ‘Mr Gopal, let’s not raise our voice. Raghav, you don’t have to be 
an activist in every story,’ Ashok said. ‘Sir, I hardly wrote anything. I didn’t probe the building violations in 
the college.’ ‘There are no violations. All our plans are approved,’ I said. ‘And how did Shukla get these 
approvals? Anyway, I didn’t mention any of that.’ ‘Even the Ganga Action Plan is old news, Raghav,’ Ashok 
said. ‘Unless you have new, solid evidence, no point repeating it. We can’t keep spoiling someone’s name.’ 
Raghav ran his fingers through his hair distractedly. ‘Fine, I won’t do it until I find something solid. May I 
leave now?’
‘You haven’t apologised to Gopal sir,’ Sailesh said. ‘GangaTech’s our client.’ ‘Editorial only apologises for 
genuine errors,’ Raghav said. ‘Or if your chief editor tells you to,’ Sailesh said, his voice firm. Raghav 
looked at Ashok. Ashok kept quiet. ‘Sir, how can you ...’ Raghav began. ‘Raghav, let’s get it over with. I 
have to sign off the next edition in one hour,’ Ashok said, turning back to his computer screen. Silence for 
ten seconds or so. ‘I’m sorry,’ Raghav said on a sigh. ‘It’s okay,’ I said, but Raghav had already stomped 
out of the room. You and Raghav had an argument?’ Aarti said. She had called me late at night, her 
preferred time. ‘He told you?’ I said. ‘I suggested that the three of us meet up and he almost bit my head 
off,’ she said. ‘No way! I like your head,’ I said. ‘The hotel opens next week. I thought I would take 
permission and show you guys the place beforehand. It is so beautiful,’ she said. ‘You can show him 
separately’ I said. ‘What happened?’ Aarti said. ‘You met him, right? Why doesn’t anybody tell me 
anything?’ ‘It was work-related, don’t worry. All settled now.’ ‘If you say so. Can you come around 
tomorrow?’ ‘Of course.’ ‘Good night, Director saheb!'                                                            ? I waited for Aarti 
at the Ramada Hotel entrance. The security wouldn’t let me in. Aarti arrived and flashed her staff card and 
I followed her in. She wore a maroon Banarasi sari, her uniform. ‘Aarti Pratap Pradhan - Guest Relations 
Trainee,’ her badge said.
‘Wow, you look so different,’ I said. ‘Different? Formal? Is that all you say?’ she mocked. ‘No ... You look 
great. But I didn’t expect to see you in a sari,’ I said. ‘Didn’t expect what? That your stupid classmate from 
school could get a real job?’ she wiggled her eyebrows, hands on hips. ‘At the staff canteen’ she said. We 
took stainless-steel elevators to the third floor. She had a master key card to every room. ‘I am not 
supposed to bring anyone to the hotel, by the way,’ she confided. ‘So?’ I said, wondering if it meant we 
should leave. ‘I am telling you how important you are. I am risking my job for you.’ ‘If they fire you, I will 
hire you.’ Our eyes met. We burst into laughter. We had not shared such a moment in years. We used to 
laugh like this in school - in sync and for the silliest of things - a burping kid in class, her mimicking the 
teachers, me pretending to sleep during History period. She opened room number 3103. I had never seen 
anything so luxurious in my whole life. ‘Cool,’ I said. ‘Isn’t it?’ She sat on the large bed with its six cushions 
of bright red silk. ‘This bed is heaven! Sit and see.’ ‘Are you sure?’ I said. ‘Sit, no,’ she said. We sat next to 
each other, me on the edge of the bed. ‘It’s nice,’ I said, as if I was a mattress inspector by profession. ‘It’s 
more comfortable lying down,’ she said. I looked at her, aghast. She saw my expression and started to 
laugh, holding her stomach. ‘I am not saying let’s,’ she said. ‘Since when did you become so serious?’ We 
spent the next twenty minutes playing around with light switches and bathroom taps. I had never
been with her in a solitary place like this. It was going to my head. And I sensed a slight tension in the air. 
Maybe the tension was only on my side. ‘Let’s go.’ I checked my watch. I had to be back in the campus 
soon. ‘Okay,’ she said and shut the washbasin tap. We stepped out of the room. A man in a crisp new suit 
saw us come out. ‘Aarti?’ he said, surprised. The colour vanished from Aarti’s face. ‘Sir,’ she said. I read the 
tag on the man’s suit. Binayak Shastri, Banquet Manager. ‘What are you doing here?’ he said. ‘Sir,’ she 
said, ‘this is Mr Gopal Mishra. He is a client.’ ‘We haven’t opened yet,’ he said, still suspicious. ‘Hi,’ I said, 
offering him my hand. ‘I am the director of the GangaTech group of colleges’ He shook my hand. ‘We are 
thinking of doing a college event here’ I said. We walked towards the elevator. I was hoping he would ask 
no further questions when he said, ‘What kind of event?’ ‘A dinner for the top companies that we call for 
placement,’ I said. Aarti avoided eye contact with everyone. ‘Sure, we will be happy to assist you,’ Binayak 
said, as he handed me his card. I guessed that our staff-canteen lunch plan had to be dropped. ‘I am 
running late, but my team will get in touch with you,’ I said as we came to the lobby. Aarti gave me a 
professional smile and disappeared behind the reception desk. Binayak chose to wait with me till my car 
arrived. ‘How come you wanted to see the rooms?’ Binayak asked. ‘We will have guest faculty. Maybe 
from abroad,’ I said. At that moment, thankfully, my driver drove into the porch.
‘Yeah. You are quite stupid,’ I pretended to agree, which made her punch my arm playfully. We entered the 
hotel lobby. Construction workers were using noisy polishing machines on the already shiny Italian marble. 
Smell of paint pervaded the air. She took me to a restaurant with plush velvet chairs. ‘This will be our bar - 
Toxic.’ The hotel would ensure that even as people visited the city to wash their sins, they’d commit new 
ones. We walked around the hotel to see the rest of the facilities. ‘So, why won’t people tell me anything?’ 
she said. ‘What?’ I said. ‘What happened between Raghav and you?’ ‘The college didn’t like a story the 
newspaper did. He apologised. End of story.’ I gave her a two-minute summary of what had happened, 
making her swear that she would never tell Raghav I told her. She told me she hadn’t even told Raghav she 
was meeting me, so there was no question of telling him anything. That’s what human relationships are 
about - selective sharing and hiding of information to the point of crazy confusion. We found ourselves in 
an ethnic-theme restaurant. ‘Aangan, for Indian cuisine,’ she explained. She took me to the gym next. I 
saw the treadmills with TVs attached to them. ‘Imported?’ I said. She nodded. ‘Sometimes I feel so guilty,’ 
she said. Girls can handle simultaneous multi-topic conversations with ease. ‘Why?’ ‘I spoilt your friendship 
with Raghav,’ she said. ‘That’s not true,’ I said. She sat down on a bench-press. I took a balancing ball and 
used it as a stool. ‘All three of us used to befriends in our childhood. What happened?’ she said, her eyes 
filling up. ‘Life,’ I said. ‘Life happened.’ ‘Without me, things wouldn’t be so bad between the two of you,’ 
she said. ‘No, that’s not true. I didn’t deserve you. Raghav had nothing to do with it,’ I said.
‘Never say that,’ Aarti said, her voice echoing in the empty gym. ‘It’s not that you don’t deserve me. You 
are a great guy, Gopal. And we click so well.’ ‘But you don’t feel that way about me, I know, I know. I am 
hungry. Where are we having lunch?’ ‘It’s not that,’ she said. ‘What?’ ‘Its not like that with girls. It’s 
sometimes about timing, and sometimes about how much you push.’ ‘I didn’t push enough for a 
relationship?’ I said. ‘You pushed too much,’ she said and wiped her eye. I didn’t know if I should console 
her. One, she belonged to someone else. Two, we sat at her workplace. I picked up a 20-pound dumbbell 
instead. I found it heavy. However, I pretended to lift it easily in front of Aarti. Raghav could probably lift 
twice as much, I thought. Why did I always compete with Raghav on every damn thing? ‘I am sorry,’ I said. 
I’m sorry if I put too much pressure.’ ‘You came at a time when I didn’t feel ready for anything. You 
wanted it too much. You wanted to lean on me. I didn’t think I could be a strong enough support.’ ‘What is 
this? My performance evaluation day?’ I said. I did a set of five with the dumbbell before keeping it down. 
‘I am just saying ... I don’t know why. I guess I really need to talk.’ ‘Or need to be heard,’ I said. We looked 
at each other. ‘Yes, exactly that. How well you know me, Gopal’ ‘Too well,’ I said and smiled. ‘You want to 
see the rooms before we have lunch?’ she said. ‘Sure. Where are we eating?’ I said. ‘At the staff canteen’ 
she said. We took stainless-steel elevators to the third floor. She had a master key card to every room.
‘I am not supposed to bring anyone to the hotel, by the way,’ she confided. ‘So?’ I said, wondering if it 
meant we should leave. ‘I am telling you how important you are. I am risking my job for you.’ ‘If they fire 
you, I will hire you.’ Our eyes met. We burst into laughter. We had not shared such a moment in years. We 
used to laugh like this in school - in sync and for the silliest of things - a burping kid in class, her mimicking 
the teachers, me pretending to sleep during History period. She opened room number 3103. I had never 
seen anything so luxurious in my whole life. ‘Cool,’ I said. ‘Isn’t it?’ She sat on the large bed with its six 
cushions of bright red silk. ‘This bed is heaven! Sit and see.’ ‘Are you sure?’ I said. ‘Sit, no,’ she said. We sat 
next to each other, me on the edge of the bed. ‘It’s nice,’ I said, as if I was a mattress inspector by 
profession. ‘It’s more comfortable lying down,’ she said. I looked at her, aghast. She saw my expression 
and started to laugh, holding her stomach. ‘I am not saying let’s,’ she said. ‘Since when did you become so 
serious?’ We spent the next twenty minutes playing around with light switches and bathroom taps. I had 
never been with her in a solitary place like this. It was going to my head. And I sensed a slight tension in the 
air. Maybe the tension was only on my side. ‘Let’s go.’ I checked my watch. I had to be back in the campus 
soon. ‘Okay,’ she said and shut the washbasin tap. We stepped out of the room. A man in a crisp new suit 
saw us come out. ‘Aarti?’ he said, surprised. The colour vanished from Aarti’s face.
‘Sir,’ she said. I read the tag on the man’s suit. Binayak Shastri, Banquet Manager. ‘What are you doing 
here?’ he said. ‘Sir,’ she said, ‘this is Mr Gopal Mishra. He is a client.’ ‘We haven’t opened yet,’ he said, still 
suspicious. ‘Hi,’ I said, offering him my hand. ‘I am the director of the GangaTech group of colleges’ He 
shook my hand. ‘We are thinking of doing a college event here’ I said. We walked towards the elevator. I 
was hoping he would ask no further questions when he said, ‘What kind of event?’ ‘A dinner for the top 
companies that we call for placement,’ I said. Aarti avoided eye contact with everyone. ‘Sure, we will be 
happy to assist you,’ Binayak said, as he handed me his card. I guessed that our staff-canteen lunch plan 
had to be dropped. ‘I am running late, but my team will get in touch with you,’ I said as we came to the 
lobby. Aarti gave me a professional smile and disappeared behind the reception desk. Binayak chose to 
wait with me till my car arrived. ‘How come you wanted to see the rooms?’ Binayak asked. ‘We will have 
guest faculty. Maybe from abroad,’ I said. At that moment, thankfully, my driver drove into the porch. 
‘Yeah. You are quite stupid,’ I pretended to agree, which made her punch my arm playfully. We entered the 
hotel lobby. Construction workers were using noisy polishing machines on the already shiny Italian marble. 
Smell of paint pervaded the air. She took me to a restaurant with plush velvet chairs. ‘This will be our bar - 
Toxic.’ The hotel would ensure that even as people visited the city to wash their sins, they’d commit new 
ones. We walked around the hotel to see the rest of the facilities. ‘So, why won’t people tell me anything?’ 
she said.
‘What?’ I said. ‘What happened between Raghav and you?’ ‘The college didn’t like a story the newspaper 
did. He apologised. End of story.’ I gave her a two-minute summary of what had happened, making her 
swear that she would never tell Raghav I told her. She told me she hadn’t even told Raghav she was 
meeting me, so there was no question of telling him anything. That’s what human relationships are about - 
selective sharing and hiding of information to the point of crazy confusion. We found ourselves in an 
ethnic-theme restaurant. ‘Aangan, for Indian cuisine,’ she explained. She took me to the gym next. I saw 
the treadmills with TVs attached to them. ‘Imported?’ I said. She nodded. ‘Sometimes I feel so guilty,’ she 
said. Girls can handle simultaneous multi-topic conversations with ease. ‘Why?’ ‘I spoilt your friendship 
with Raghav,’ she said. ‘That’s not true,’ I said. She sat down on a bench-press. I took a balancing ball and 
used it as a stool. ‘All three of us used to befriends in our childhood. What happened?’ she said, her eyes 
filling up. ‘Life,’ I said. ‘Life happened.’ ‘Without me, things wouldn’t be so bad between the two of you,’ 
she said. ‘No, that’s not true. I didn’t deserve you. Raghav had nothing to do with it,’ I said. ‘Never say 
that,’ Aarti said, her voice echoing in the empty gym. ‘It’s not that you don’t deserve me. You are a great 
guy, Gopal. And we click so well.’ ‘But you don’t feel that way about me, I know, I know. I am hungry. 
Where are we having lunch?’ ‘It’s not that,’ she said. ‘What?’ ‘Its not like that with girls. It’s sometimes 
about timing, and sometimes about how much you push.’
‘I didn’t push enough for a relationship?’ I said. ‘You pushed too much,’ she said and wiped her eye. I didn’t 
know if I should console her. One, she belonged to someone else. Two, we sat at her workplace. I picked 
up a 20-pound dumbbell instead. I found it heavy. However, I pretended to lift it easily in front of Aarti. 
Raghav could probably lift twice as much, I thought. Why did I always compete with Raghav on every damn 
thing? ‘I am sorry,’ I said. I’m sorry if I put too much pressure.’ ‘You came at a time when I didn’t feel ready 
for anything. You wanted it too much. You wanted to lean on me. I didn’t think I could be a strong enough 
support.’ ‘What is this? My performance evaluation day?’ I said. I did a set of five with the dumbbell before 
keeping it down. ‘I am just saying ... I don’t know why. I guess I really need to talk.’ ‘Or need to be heard,’ I 
said. We looked at each other. ‘Yes, exactly that. How well you know me, Gopal’ ‘Too well,’ I said and 
smiled. ‘You want to see the rooms before we have lunch?’ she said. ‘Sure. Where are we eating?’ I said. 
‘At the staff canteen’ she said. We took stainless-steel elevators to the third floor. She had a master key 
card to every room. ‘I am not supposed to bring anyone to the hotel, by the way,’ she confided. ‘So?’ I 
said, wondering if it meant we should leave. ‘I am telling you how important you are. I am risking my job 
for you.’ ‘If they fire you, I will hire you.’ Our eyes met. We burst into laughter. We had not shared such a 
moment in years. We used to laugh
like this in school - in sync and for the silliest of things - a burping kid in class, her mimicking the teachers, 
me pretending to sleep during History period. She opened room number 3103. I had never seen anything so 
luxurious in my whole life. ‘Cool,’ I said. ‘Isn’t it?’ She sat on the large bed with its six cushions of bright red 
silk. ‘This bed is heaven! Sit and see.’ ‘Are you sure?’ I said. ‘Sit, no,’ she said. We sat next to each other, 
me on the edge of the bed. ‘It’s nice,’ I said, as if I was a mattress inspector by profession. ‘It’s more 
comfortable lying down,’ she said. I looked at her, aghast. She saw my expression and started to laugh, 
holding her stomach. ‘I am not saying let’s,’ she said. ‘Since when did you become so serious?’ We spent 
the next twenty minutes playing around with light switches and bathroom taps. I had never been with her 
in a solitary place like this. It was going to my head. And I sensed a slight tension in the air. Maybe the 
tension was only on my side. ‘Let’s go.’ I checked my watch. I had to be back in the campus soon. ‘Okay,’ 
she said and shut the washbasin tap. We stepped out of the room. A man in a crisp new suit saw us come 
out. ‘Aarti?’ he said, surprised. The colour vanished from Aarti’s face. ‘Sir,’ she said. I read the tag on the 
man’s suit. Binayak Shastri, Banquet Manager. ‘What are you doing here?’ he said. ‘Sir,’ she said, ‘this is Mr 
Gopal Mishra. He is a client.’ ‘We haven’t opened yet,’ he said, still suspicious. ‘Hi,’ I said, offering him my 
hand. ‘I am the director of the GangaTech group of colleges’
He shook my hand. ‘We are thinking of doing a college event here’ I said. We walked towards the elevator. 
I was hoping he would ask no further questions when he said, ‘What kind of event?’ ‘A dinner for the top 
companies that we call for placement,’ I said. Aarti avoided eye contact with everyone. ‘Sure, we will be 
happy to assist you,’ Binayak said, as he handed me his card. I guessed that our staff-canteen lunch plan 
had to be dropped. ‘I am running late, but my team will get in touch with you,’ I said as we came to the 
lobby. Aarti gave me a professional smile and disappeared behind the reception desk. Binayak chose to 
wait with me till my car arrived. ‘How come you wanted to see the rooms?’ Binayak asked. ‘We will have 
guest faculty. Maybe from abroad,’ I said. At that moment, thankfully, my driver drove into the porch. 
Over the next two months we managed to fill a hundred and eighty seats out of the two hundred in our 
first batch. For the first time, I actually handed money to Shukla-ji’s accountant. Many students paid their 
fee in cash. Farmers’ kids, in particular, brought money in gunny bags, with bundles of notes accumulated 
over the years. ‘Make my son an engineer,’ a farmer pleaded with folded hands. It made life so much 
easier. For the job and dowry market a B.Tech degree never hurt. Dean Shrivastava and his gang of twenty 
faculty members took care of the classes. I kept myself busy with projects such as getting the hostel mess 
operational, hiring new staff and ensuring that the remaining construction work continued as per schedule. 
I had a limited social life. Once a week I had dinner with faculty members, mostly to discuss work. A couple 
of times, I ended up at Shukla-ji’s place. ‘You are the director of the institute. How can you still stay in your 
tiny old house?’ he said one day, after too much whisky. "The faculty bungalow will be ready soon. 1 sleep 
in the office most of the days,’ I said. Aarti, however, had come back into my life, as the only non-work 
person I spent time with. Ramada opened, she joined work and sat prettily at the Guest Relations desk in 
the lobby. On her first day of work I sent her a box of chocolates and flowers. Maybe I shouldn’t have, but 
I felt the day was important to her. I made sure the bouquet had only white roses for friendship - no red 
ones.
Hey, thanx. Really sweeeet of u!! :) came her SMS. I read the message fifty times. I finally composed a 
reply. U rwelcome. For a gr8 future career woman. She replied after ten minutes. Why r u being so nice to 
me? I had no answer. I used a women’s trick. When in doubt, send a smiley. I sent three. :) :) :) She 
messaged: Meet up after work? 7 p.m. CCD? Sure, I replied promptly. I drove down from the campus to 
Sigra to meet her. She told me about her day at work. She had helped settle five Germans into the hotel, 
arranged three cars for a ten-member Japanese delegation and sent a surprise birthday cake to an 
American in his room. She seemed happy. I didn’t think she missed being an air hostess. ‘So we met today. 
What do you do in the evenings otherwise?’ she said. ‘Not much. Stay on campus. Work,’ I said. ‘That’s 
horrible. What about friends?’ Aarti said. I shrugged. ‘I have colleagues in the college. That’s company 
enough.’ She patted my hand. ‘You should have friends. Look at me, I have you.’ ‘What about Raghav?’ I 
said. ‘He works late at the newspaper.. He has no time ...’ she said, withdrawing her hand. She did not tell 
me how Raghav would feel about our regular meetings, which is what I had really asked. She only told me 
Raghav would not find out. ‘You have to meet friends after work.’ She sounded like she was convincing 
herself, ‘I probably bore you to death with my hotel stories but...’ ‘You never bore me. Even if you don’t 
say a word,’ I said. With that, Aarti and I became friends-who-meet-after-work. We met twice a week, 
sometimes thrice. We ate at new restaurants, visited cafes, took walks in the Ravidas Park and 
occasionally watched movies. We had some unspoken rules. We didn’t have long chats on the phone, and 
mostly texted each other.
We never visited the past or talked about touchy topics. I would never touch her, even though she would 
sometimes hold my arm mid-conversation. At movie theatres, we would enter and leave separately. That’s 
what boys and girls did in Varanasi, anyway. When Raghav called, I would quietly step away so I couldn’t 
hear her. Finally, when Raghav finished work, she would leave. I couldn’t figure out why I’d started to hang 
out with her. I had become a buffer until her boyfriend got free from work. I guess I wanted a break from 
work too. And, of course, when it came to Aarti, my reasons went for a toss anyway. ‘So, Raghav has no 
idea we meet?’ I asked her one day. She shook her head, and wiped her coffee moustache.                                                 
? Raghav stayed out of my life after the inauguration day debacle. However, he couldn’t stay off his old 
tricks for long. ‘Varanasi Nagar Nigam eats, builder cheats’ Raghav Kashyap, Staff Reporter I woke up to 
this headline a month after we opened. He often wrote about black-marketeer ration shop owners, LPG 
cylinders sold illegally, the RTO officer taking bribes and other routine Indian things nobody gives a fuck 
about. I would have ignored this article too, had he not mentioned GangaTech. I skimmed a few lines. The 
article said, ‘Surprisingly the inappropriate approvals and the resultant illegal construction are right there in 
front of our eyes. Unlike other corruption cases where the wrongdoing is hidden (like the Ganga Action 
Plan scam), here the proof is for all to see. Farms are turned into colleges, which then flout all norms to 
construct as much as possible. Colleges will soon have malls next-door. Politicians, meant to protect us 
and prevent all this, are often the culprits. This is not all, the city has new hotels, residential towers and 
office buildings where the VNN has taken its cut. We have proof to compare the vast difference between 
what is allowable and what VNN approved ...' A box next to the article listed the controversial approvals. I 
read the list: 1.    The V-CON apartment building, a ten-storey tower on a low-flying zone. 2.    Hotel Vento, 
construction of which has taken over a neighbourhood park.
3.    GangaTech College - Farmland mysteriously approved. College buildings constructed beyond 
permissible floor-space index. I threw the newspaper away. I had improved my relations with Shukla-ji with 
great difficulty. I had told him that the reporter had apologised to me and that this would never happen 
again. I knew Raghav was taking revenge for the ‘sorry’ that day. He must have obtained GangaTechs 
building plan from his shady sources in VNN. I took out my phone. Before I could call him, however, 
Shukla-ji called me. ‘I don’t know how this happened,’ I said. ‘Behenchods these Dainik people are,’ Shukla-
ji said, ‘This reporter has to stop ...’ I said. ‘It’s not the reporter. The opposition must be doing this.’ ‘I 
don’t know, sir.’ ‘Or maybe someone in my own party? Jealous bastards wanting to spoil my name.’ ‘I 
don’t think so, sir’ ‘What?’ ‘It is the reporter. I know him from before. He’s the crusader-activist types. 
Plus, he had to apologise to me. He is taking revenge.’ ‘Who?’ ‘Raghav Kashyap, the name is there in the 
article.’ ‘I’ll fuck his happiness,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Should I call him?’ I said. ‘Don’t. I’ll speak to his seniors’ I 
said, ‘What about the article. Does it affect us?’ ‘If VNN calls, direct them to me,’ Shukla-ji said.                                                         
? No VNN officials called. Instead, they came straight to my college. The officials didn’t come alone, they 
came with two bulldozers.
Students peeped from classroom windows as the sounds of the earthmover disrupted classes. I came 
running to the gate. ‘Open the gates, we have come for demolition,’ said a man wearing cheap sunglasses 
and a yellow plastic helmet. ‘What?’ I said. ‘We have orders,’ said the VNN official. He took out a folded 
piece of paper from his pocket. My heart beat fast. ‘What will you demolish?’ 'The main building. There’s 
illegal construction here,’ he said, his tone defiant. The harsh morning sun hit our faces. ‘Can we talk?’ I 
said. He shook his head. I took out my phone. I called Shukla-ji. He didn’t answer. ‘This is MLA Shukla’s 
college. What is your name, sir?’ I said. ‘Rao. I am Amrit Rao. I don’t care whether you say MLA or PM.’ I 
coaxed him to be patient for ten minutes. He turned the ignition off on the bulldozers. I asked the peon to 
get soft drinks with ice for everyone. I continued to try Shukla-ji’s number. He answered at the eighth 
attempt. ‘What is it, Gopal? I had to call the CM. These stupid articles are the biggest headaches’ ‘Sir, we 
have bulldozers here.’ ‘What?’ Shukla-ji said. I handed the phone to Rao, who repeated his mission to the 
MLA. However, he became silent as the MLA spoke at the other end. Rao stepped aside to have a lengthy 
animated conversation with Shuklaji for ten minutes. Rao returned my phone. ‘Here, Shukla-ji wants to 
speak to you.’ ‘Sir?’ I said, still dazed. ‘How much cash do you have in the office?’ Shukla-ji wanted to 
know. ‘Not sure, sir. Around two lakhs in the safe.’ ‘Give it to him. Put the notes in an empty cement bag, 
topped up with sand.’
‘Yes, sir,’ I said. ‘His colleagues should not see it. He has a solid reputation.’ ‘Okay, sir.’ ‘And he has to 
break something. He can t go back without demolition pictures’ ‘What?’ ‘Is there anything partially 
constructed you don’t need immediately?’ ‘Sir, the students are going to see the demolition,’ I said. ‘No 
choice. This reporter friend of yours has kicked us right in the ...’ ‘He’s no longer a friend, sir,’ I said. ‘He’s 
fucked. Anyway, tell me what can be broken easily and will cost the least to fix?’ ‘The machining lab. We 
can put the machines somewhere else,’ I said. ‘Do that. Then draw a cross sign with chalk outside the lab. 
Let them do the rest. Don’t forget the cement bag.’ Shukla-ji hung up. I signalled the security guard to 
open the gates. Rao gave me an oily smile. I can’t do a movie today. I have to leave in ten minutes’ Aarti 
frowned as she stepped into my Innova. I had come to pick her up at the hotel with tickets for the 7.30 
p.m. show of Rock On. ‘Can you get a refund?’ I tore up the tickets. ‘Gopal!’ she said. ‘What are you 
doing? You shouldn’t have bought tickets without asking me.’ ‘Why are you distraught?’ ‘It’s about 
Raghav. I have to be with him.’ ‘What?’ I said. ‘Don’t talk about Raghav. Whose rule is that, Mr Mishra?’ 
‘Mine. But I want to know why you are cancelling the plan.’
‘I’ll tell you. Can you drop me home?’ ‘DM’s bungalow,’ I told the driver. ‘Keep it to yourself, okay?’ Aarti 
said. ‘He told me not to tell anyone. I can trust you, right?’ ‘Do I have to answer that?’ I said. ‘Fine. Raghav 
lost his job,’ she said. ‘What?’ I said. A surge of warm joy ran through me. ‘I’m shocked. Dainik considered 
him a star reporter,’ Aarti said. ‘Did they give a reason?’ I said. The reason was sitting next to her. ‘I don’t 
know. He didn’t say. He just said the management asked him to leave.’ ‘Recession?’ I said in a mock-
concerned voice. ‘They cut staff in tough times to save costs’ ‘How much can you save by firing a trainee 
reporter? And Dainik is doing well.’ The car reached Aarti s home. ‘Is he at your place?’ I said as she 
stepped out. She shook her head. ‘I’ll go meet him. I wanted to come home and change.’ ‘How did he 
sound? Upset?’ I said. ‘Very, very angry,’ Aarti said and rushed off.                                                          ? I 
shouldn’t have called him. However, I couldn’t resist calling Raghav at midnight. I wanted to see if he 
would remain defiant in his unemployed state. I held a tall whisky glass in my right hand and the phone in 
my left. I thought he wouldn’t take my call. However, he picked it up soon enough. ‘Do you need another 
apology?’ were his first words. ‘Hi, Raghav,’ I said, my voice calm. ‘How are things?’ ‘Quite good. What is 
bothering you that you called?’ ‘Don’t be upset with me,’ I said.
‘You only get upset with people you care about,’ Raghav said. ‘You cared about your job’. ‘Bye, Gopal,’ he 
said. ‘I told you not to write shit about us,’ I said. ‘I don’t need to ask you how to do my job.’ I took a big 
gulp of whisky. ‘Oh yeah, how can you? BHU pass-out, taking advice from an uneducated man like me.’ He 
remained silent as I filled my glass again. The whisky made me feel more confident than ever before. ‘It’s 
not about education, Gopal. It’s the person you have become. I can’t believe it!’ ‘Rich. Successful. Hard to 
believe, huh? The person who cleared JEE is unemployed’ ‘I’ll find a job, Gopal. And tell that MLA of yours - 
just because he could get a trainee fired from Dainik doesn’t mean he can silence the truth.’ ‘I could give 
you a job, Raghav. Want to work for me?’ I only heard a click in response.                                                        ? 
‘Revolution 2020,’ Aarti said, chin in hands and both her elbows on the table. We had come to the Ramada 
Hotel coffee shop. It was an off-day for her. She could visit the restaurants as a customer in regular civilian 
clothes. Waiters smiled at her in recognition, and she greeted them back. Ever since Raghav lost his job, 
she hadn’t met me too often as she wanted to be with him. Finally, on her weekly holiday I coaxed her to 
meet up. ‘What’s that?’ I said. ‘Don’t ask questions. Revolution 2020 - when I say this to you, what comes 
to your mind? What could it be?’ She blinked a couple of times as she waited for me to reply. I noticed how 
appealing she looked even in a simple orange T-shirt and black jeans. ‘A new restaurant? Is Ramada 
opening one?’ She laughed.
‘What’s so funny?’ I said. ‘What is this Revolution 2020?’ ‘It’s a new newspaper. Raghav’s.’ ‘His own 
newspaper?’ I said, startled. ‘Yeah. He decided not to take up another job.’ Even if he wanted Raghav 
could not get a media job in Varanasi, at least in the top papers. Shukla-ji had informed all the major 
editors. Aarti, of course, didn’t know this. She didn’t even know why Raghav had lost his job. ‘Raghav said 
Dainik didn’t give him a reason. Is that fair?’ she said. ‘There’s politics in organisations. He will learn to fit 
in’ I said. ‘He doesn’t want to fit in. He wants to change journalism. Give it some teeth,’ Aarti said. We 
ordered our coffee. Alongside, the waiters also gave us freshly baked cookies and muffins. ‘Did we order 
all this?’ I said. ‘Contacts,’ she said and winked at me. ‘How can he start a newspaper?’ I said. ‘You need 
money.’ ‘It’s not money. It’s the content that matters,’ Aarti said and took a sip. A sliver of foam was left 
behind on her lip. Aarti, you really believe this? You are a practical girl.’ ‘It’s fine, Gopal. You opened a 
college. Why can’t he do this?’ ‘I had a backer - MLA Shukla, who had cash and connections.’ ‘He hates 
him. Raghav says Shukla is the most corrupt leader Varanasi has ever had,’ Aarti said. ‘That’s speculation,’ I 
said. ‘Is there any successful person who hasn’t been criticised? Shukla is high-profile and rising. People are 
trying to bring him down.’ ‘Okay, can we please not discuss politics?’ Aarti said. ‘The political gene ended 
in my family with my grandfather.’ ‘You could join,’ I said. ‘People still remember your grandfather.’ She 
raised her hand and pumped her fist to make a mock-slogan gesture. ‘Vote for me, I will give you free 
cookies with coffee.’ She smiled. ‘No, thanks. I am happy in Ramada.’
I smiled back. Anyway, so how exactly is he going to start his ... revolving what?’ ‘Revolution 2020. That’s 
his goal. That India must have a full-blown revolution by 2020. Power will be with the youth. We will 
dismantle the old corrupt system and put a new one in place.’ ‘And he’s going to do that from Varanasi?’ I 
sounded as skeptical as I felt. ‘Yes, of course. Kids from big cities are cushioned against the system. They 
have decent colleges, get good breaks. The revolution has to start from a small city.’ ‘He’s definitely got 
you on board,’ I said. ‘What better place to start than the city that cleanses?’ she said. She spoke in an 
enthusiastic voice. Maybe this was what she liked about Raghav. His passionate approach to life, even if it 
was outlandish and fantastic. Girls don’t like reality that much. Or practical questions. ‘How does this 
newspaper work? Who pays for the printing, paper and promotion while the revolution comes?’ She 
sobered quickly. ‘So it isn’t exactly a newspaper to start with. It is like a newsletter. Just one big sheet.’ 
‘Okay?’ I egged her on. ‘On one side of the paper will be matrimonials. People from Varanasi love fixing 
marriages. So he will put ads for local brides and grooms on that side. Free at first, and charge later. 
Maybe some job ads too.’ ‘Why wouldn’t people advertise in established newspapers?’ ‘Revolution 2020 
ads will cost much lower and will be extremely local. You can find brides and grooms down your own 
street.’ I nodded. ‘On the other side, Raghav will do local news stories. And since it is not a proper 
newspaper, he can be edgier and do more sting operations’ ‘He loves doing that,’ I agreed. ‘So that’s it. 
Printing costs are low, as there is only one big sheet to begin with. He will contact temples for the initial 
ads, so let’s see. Do you like the name?’ I shrugged my shoulders. She bit into a muffin. ‘Everyone has their 
thing, Gopal,’ Aarti said, her mouth full. ‘You have your college. This is his.’ ‘It will never make money,’ I 
said.
‘So?’ She waved her muffin at me. ‘Money isn’t everything.’ ‘Easy to say that when you are eating cakes in 
a five-star hotel,’ I said. She grinned and kept her muffin down. ‘I like money,’ I said. ‘Nothing wrong with 
that. My deal is simple. Money or revolution, everyone should follow their heart.’ ‘Sometimes your heart 
can lead you to a dead end,’ I said. She paused and looked at me as she digested my statement. ‘Ahh,’ she 
pretended to marvel, ‘nice. Striking below the belt again, are we?’ ‘Of course not,’ I said. I asked for the 
bill, which came with a twenty per cent staff discount. We came to the lobby. ‘Do you have to leave soon?’ 
I said. ‘Not super-soon, why?’ ‘I haven’t rowed for a year,’ I said. Phoolchand, my favourite Assi Ghat 
boatman, recognised me from a distance. He looked amused to see me in a formal suit. He untied the boat 
for us. I helped Aarti on board and tipped him an extra hundred bucks. He slid a small paper packet in my 
hand. ‘What’s this?’ ‘Good stuff. I have sourced it from the Aghori sadhus. You have a matchbox?’ I 
understood what he had given me. Aarti did too, and gave me a sly smile. I bought a few cigarettes and 
matchbox from the paan shop. I dipped the oars into the water, and together Aarti and I floated away. ‘Its 
been ages. I have missed this, Raghav,’ she said. ‘Gopal,’ I corrected without looking at her. ‘What? Did I 
say Raghav? Oh, sorry. I am so sorry. I didn’t mean to ...’ ‘It’s okay,’ I said. I rowed to the opposite bank of 
the river. The oars felt rough. My arms were not as strong as they
used to be, when I did this on a regular basis. The main ghats of Varanasi are packed end to end with 
temples and ancient structures. The soft sandy shore on the other side of the river looked desolate. A small 
tea kiosk was the lone hub; it served the occasional tourists who went there on a boat. I anchored the boat 
to a tree stump. The evening sun turned the Varanasi skyline orange. ‘Let’s take a walk,’ said Aarti, raising 
her face to feel the breeze. We viewed the buzzing ghats on the opposite side. We could see the frantic 
activity, but not hear a thing.
We strolled for a while, then went to the kiosk and sat on stools to order tea.
‘Are you going to smoke what Phoolchand gave you?’ ‘If you don’t mind,’ I said. She shrugged. I opened 
the pack of cigarettes. I teased the tobacco out of one of them, and pushed the dried marijuana in. I lit it 
and took a puff. ‘May I try?’ she said. I shook my head. Her phone rang. She took it out from her bag. The 
screen flashed ‘Raghav calling’. ‘Shh! Quiet,’ she signalled to me. ‘Hi,’ she said into the phone. She listened 
as Raghav spoke for a while. ‘That’s great. Yes, put the pandit-ji’s picture in the paper. He will be so happy. 
He will give you all the marriage listings’ she said and grinned. ‘Yes,’ she continued, ‘still at the hotel. This is 
a terrible industry, they make you work on an off-day ... Yes, a whole bus of French tourists has arrived.’ 
She mimed at me to be patient. I nodded as I watched the sky turn dark. ‘Yes, baby, I miss you,’ Aarti 
signed off. She reached for the joint. ‘What?’ I said. ‘Give me a puff.’ ‘Are you crazy?’
‘Why? Just because I am a girl? True colours of a Varanasi man, eh?’ ‘You will reek of it.’ ‘I’ll go straight to 
the shower. And what are all the Banarasi paans for? I’ll have a fragrant one before I go,’ she said. I passed 
her the joint. She took a few puffs. ‘It doesn’t seem to have any effect on me,’ she grumbled. We finished 
our tea and stood up. She walked close to the water. ‘Come, let’s see the aarti lamps in the water,’ she 
said. ‘It’s late,’ I said. ‘We’d better go.’ ‘I like it here. Come,’ she said and sat on the sand. She patted the 
ground next to her. I sat down beside her. ‘Your phone will ring again,’ I said. ‘Whatever,’ she said. ‘When 
he worked at Dainik, he never called. Now it is a break, so he does. Wait until his Revolution 2020 starts’ ‘Is 
he serious about it?’ I said disbelievingly. ‘Oh, yeah. The first issue comes out in two weeks,’ she said. I 
finished my joint and contemplated the holy river. The world came to wash away their sins in Varanasi. Did 
they ever stop to think about Varanasi for a moment - about what its people would do with all the sins they 
left behind? The grass had turned me philosophical. I flexed my fingers, preparing myself for the tough ride 
back. Aarti took my right hand into her lap and started to massage it. I looked at her in surprise. ‘Nice?’ she 
said. I didn’t say anything. Not a thing. I didn’t withdraw my hand either. A full moon emerged in the sky. 
‘It’s purnima, she said softly. The sand beneath us, her face and the moonlight.... Suddenly she began to 
blink furiously. ‘You okay?’ I asked. She shook her head, still blinking. A particle of sand had blown into her 
eye. I withdrew my hand from her grasp and cupped her face.
‘Open your eyes,’ I said. She shook her head again. ‘Open, Aarti,’ I said. I cradled her head with both hands. 
She opened her right eye. I blew into it. ‘You okay?’ I said. She nodded, her eyes shut again. I heard her 
sniff. ‘Are you hurt?’ I said. She began to sob. She rested her forehead on my shoulder. ‘What’s wrong, 
Aarti?’ ‘I’m scared for Raghav. I hope he doesn’t fail in life.’ I held the back of her head. She buried her 
face in my chest. It felt strange to console her about her boyfriend. However, I liked the feel of her against 
me. ‘He’ll be fine. I hate him, but Raghav is capable. He’ll be fine. He is a little impractical but not bad at 
heart,’ I said. She lifted her head, her face turned up to me trustingly. I stroked her hair. 'I miss how you 
cared for me,’ she said. Our faces were only a breath apart. The proximity stunned me. I couldn’t speak. ‘I 
have no one to talk to when I am low. Thank you,’ she said. Droplets from the Ganga splattered on us. I 
felt compelled to move my face forward. My lips met hers. She didn’t kiss me back. She didn’t move away 
either. But soon - too soon - she pushed me away. ‘Gopal!’ she said. I didn’t say anything. I kind of 
expected it. In fact, I wanted her to yell at me more. ‘I’m sorry,’ I said. I looked away. In the distance I saw 
the aarti diyas wobble on the water, as if admonishing me. ‘Let’s go. I am late,’ she said. She was up in a 
split second and was taking rapid strides towards the boat. I paid the tea-shop owner and ran to catch up 
with her. ‘I have to row you back. You can’t run away,’ I said.
She kept silent. She refused to even look at me. Okay, I admit I had done wrong, but she didn’t have to 
treat me like this. A few moments ago she had massaged my hands and buried her face in my chest. She sat 
as far as possible from me in the boat. I slapped the oars hard on the water as I rowed back, ‘I said sorry 
already,’ I said midway. ‘Can we not talk please?’ she said. The boatman noticed our sour moods. ‘Didn’t 
like the maal?' Phoolchand asked. I didn’t respond. Aarti walked on. ‘Where are you going? I will drop you 
home,’ I said. ‘I’ll take an auto,’ she said and disappeared from my sight. Even Baba’s death hadn’t left me 
so sleepless. But Aarti’s flight from Assi had me staring at the office walls at 4 a.m. two nights after the 
boat ride. I was too nervous to call or message her though I could think of nothing but her. Her face, her 
drenched eyes and her lips on mine ... I couldn’t focus on the contractors plans for my upcoming 
bungalows bathrooms. I sat through faculty meetings like a zombie, staring at my phone nonstop. 
‘Expecting a call, sir?’ Dean Shrivastava said. I shook my head, only to check my phone again. How can god 
give girls so much power? How can they turn productive, busy and ambitious men into a wilting mass of 
uselessness. ‘Sir, so you are okay with us conducting mid-terms next week?’ said Anmol, the civil 
engineering professor. ‘Yes,’ I managed to respond while wondering what I’d do if she didn’t call ever. On 
my third sleepless night my phone beeped at two in the morning. A message from her: Don't call or 
message me. What made her send this message? I hadn’t called or messaged. I was sitting there holding 
the phone when my phone beeped again. Ever, said her next message. She isn’t sleeping and she is thinking 
of me - my optimistic, irrational brain kicked into action. Why
did she send these messages? What do they mean in Girlese? Since Girlese often means saying the 
opposite of what is meant, did this mean - call me? Okay, I replied. I waited for an hour but got no 
response. Soon I drifted off into a dream about boat rides.                                                        ? A fluorescent 
pink A3-sized sheet fell out of the morning paper. I thought it was a flyer for a travel agency or tuition 
classes. However, it had a masthead like a newspaper. Aha, I smirked, Raghav’s attempt to change the 
world. Revolution 2020, it said in big, bold font. Below was a letter from the editor, headlined: ‘Because 
Enough is Enough’. I read on. What do you say about a society whose top leaders are the biggest crooks? 
What do you do in a system where almost anyone with power is corrupt? India has suffered enough. From 
childhood we are told India is a poor country. Why? There are countries in this world where an average 
person makes more than fifty times that an average Indian makes. Fifty times? Are their people really fifty 
times more capable than us? Does an Indian farmer not work hard? Does an Indian student not study? Do 
we not want to do well? Why, why are we then doomed to be poor? I laughed at Raghavs self-indulgent 
trip. I sipped my morning tea and continued to read. This has to stop. We have to clean the system. Che 
Guevara, the great revolutionary, once said, ‘Power is not an apple that falls from a tree into your lap. 
Power has to be snatched from people who already have it.’ We have to start a revolution, a revolution 
that resets our corrupt system. A system that shifts power back into the hands of the people, and treats 
politicians like workers, not kings. Of course, this wont happen overnight. This also won’t happen until the 
real suffering begins. As India’s young population increases, we will need more good colleges and jobs. 
Soon, there won’t be enough. People will realise who is fooling them. It could take ten years. I call it 
Revolution 2020, the year in which it will happen, the movement that will finally shake the muck off India. 
When the Internet will connect all colleges across the country. When we will go on strike, shut down 
everything, until things are fixed. When young people will leave their classes and offices and come on to 
the streets. When Indians will get justice and the guilty will be punished. And it will all begin in Varanasi. For 
that reason, we bring you Revolution 2020. Yours truly, Raghav Kashyap Editor
I smiled as I saw a crudely sketched map of India under the article. It had a dot on Varanasi, with arrows 
connecting it to various cities. The map had a little ‘Revolution 2020 potential plan attached to it. In 
various cities, it listed the main colleges that would lead the revolution there. My accountant came into my 
office for my signatures on the month-end accounts. My amused expression puzzled him. ‘What happened, 
sir? Reading jokes?’ he said. I nodded. The front page also carried an expose on cremation shops in 
Varanasi selling ordinary wood as sandalwood after spraying it with synthetic perfume. My accountant saw 
the pink-coloured paper. ‘Is this an ad? A poster?’ he said. ‘I have no idea,’ I said. I turned over the 
Revolution 2020 page and couldn’t help but laugh. In contrast to the bombast in the front, the back page 
had matrimonial ads! I read one out aloud. ‘Wanted beautiful/educated/fair/homely virgin for twenty-five-
year Kayasth Brahmin engineer working in stable government job. Girl must be willing to stay in joint family 
and respect traditional values’. I handed Raghav’s paper to my accountant. ‘Searching for a girl, sir?’ he 
said. I looked how I felt - offended. ‘Sorry, sir,’ he said. ‘Sir, we have more requests for admissions,’ he 
sought to change the subject. ‘We are full,’ I said, ‘you know that. We have as many students as we are 
authorised to take.’ ‘Sir, if the AICTE can adjust...’ I sighed. ‘How many more?’ ‘Five, ten ...’ he said. 
‘Twenty at the most.’ ‘Take them in,’ I said. ‘I’ll manage the AICTE when the time comes.’ ‘Yes, sir,’ he said 
and left the office. I picked up the pink rag, ripped it apart, bundled up the shreds and threw them in the 
dustbin.
                                                          ? Every Friday I made rounds of the classes. I kept a three-day stubble to 
look old enough to be a director. I entered a classroom where a maths class was in progress. The professor 
stopped lecturing when he sighted me. The entire class of forty students stood up. It felt good. I could go 
to any of the eight classrooms and the same would happen. Money, status and power -however evil 
people may say these are - get you respect in life. A few years back I was begging at career fairs for an 
admission. Today, hundreds stood up to attention when I arrived. ‘Good afternoon, Director sir,’ the 
professor said. I nodded in response. A boy in an ill-fitting shirt in the front row blinked rapidly when I 
addressed him. ‘What is your name?’ ‘Manoj, sir,’ he said. ‘Where are you from?’ I said. ‘Sarnath, sir,’ he 
said. ‘Parents work there?’ I said. ‘We have land, sir. My father is a farmer.’ I immediately softened. ‘You 
don’t want to be a farmer?’ He didn’t answer, afraid of how he might be judged by the response. I 
understood. ‘Any problems at Ganga'I'ech?' I said. ‘No, sir,’ he said nervously. ‘Don’t feel shy, tell me,’ I 
said. ‘Too much English, sir,’ he said. ‘I don’t understand it well.’ ‘Learn it. The world wont let you live 
otherwise. Okay?’ I said. He nodded. I turned to the professor. ‘Sorry to disturb you,’ I said. The professor 
smiled. He reminded me of Mr Pulley in Kota.                                                        ? A dozen documents awaited 
my attention when I returned from my rounds. My phone beeped.
Aarti had sent a message: Saw R2020? Yes, I texted back. What do you think? she wanted to know. I didn’t 
respond. I started going through the documents. My phone beeped again. She had texted: ? Good luck for 
the revolution, I said. Thanks, came her reply. I wondered if that meant the end of conversation. You are 
welcome, I said anyway. Good to know, she said. What? I said. That I am still welcome, she said. I didn’t 
know what to say to that. Girls can come up with the simplest of messages that have the most complex 
meanings. I typed out another message: I am sorry about that evening. I was pondering whether to send it 
when my phone beeped again. Sorry about that evening, her message said. I gasped at the coincidence. I 
deleted what I had composed and typed again. It's fine. I shouldn't have crossed the line. I had a reply 
within seconds: Don't worry about it. Perplexed, I kept my phone away. What exactly did she mean? Why 
can’t girls be direct? Don’t worry about it? Is she just being formal? Or did she mean it is okay I kissed her, 
and that I need not worry about it ever again? Most important, had we closed the chapter or opened a 
new one? I wanted to ask her all these questions but did not have the guts. I didn’t want to keep things 
hanging either. One kiss, and her silence thereafter, had devastated me. I didn’t want to kiss her just once. 
I wanted to kiss her a million times, or however many times it was possible for a person to kiss another 
person in a lifetime. I did not want to talk to her in cryptic
messages. I wanted to have her by my side all the time. I didn’t give a fuck about Raghav anymore. He had 
anyway become borderline cuckoo, with his pink newspaper. Aarti deserved better, and who could be 
better than me? Our college would make a crore this year. Raghav would never see a crore of his own in 
his entire fucked-up honest revolutionary life. These intense thoughts darted about in my head like little 
birds let loose from their cage. ‘Enough is enough,’ I spoke out loud and forced myself to pick up the 
phone. ‘I LOVE YOU,’ I typed and kept my thumb on the send button. But I deleted the text. I replaced it 
with a softer ‘I MiSS YOU’, but erased that as well. I went back to my files but found it hard to read even 
one sentence. I closed my eyes. Immediately, I remembered the warmth of her body when I had held her, 
the locks of her hair that brushed against my face in the breeze, and relived the moment when I had kissed 
her. My phone rang. She had called me. A part of me didn’t want to, but I picked it up in one ring. ‘Hi!’ she 
said. ‘Aarti!’ ‘Yeah?’ she said. ‘I crossed the line that day,’ I said. ‘Don’t keep saying that.’ ‘Is it okay, 
really?’ I said. ‘Really. How did you like the paper? Be honest.’ I was shocked at how effortlessly she 
switched the topic. ‘Kayasth Brahmin grooms on one page, mega-revolution on the other. Isn’t it strange?’ 
‘I told you. That’s how the paper becomes viable,’ she said. ‘What do the readers feel about that?’ I said. 
‘The response is mind-blowing. Raghav’s ex-boss from Dainik had c ... called to congratulate him,’ she 
stammered in her excitement. ‘Well, what do I know about newspapers? If people from Dainik like it, it is 
probably good,’ I said flatly. ‘You have seen nothing yet. Raghav is working on some big stories’
‘Great’ I said, my tone bland. ‘Sorry, I didn’t mean to talk only about him. Just thrilled about the first issue. 
I put a few copies in the hotel lobby too,’ she confessed with a giggle. ‘I am sure the tourists will love to 
see how fucked-up our country is,’ I said. ‘Or they may like the matrimonial's,’ Aarti pointed out. That 
evening by the river seemed to be a distant memory for her. How can girls pretend that nothing happened? 
Do they erase stuff from their brains, brush it aside, or are they just good actors? ‘Aarti,’ I said. ‘What?’ 
‘What if I...’ I said and paused. ‘What if I what?’ she said. She had put it out there. I could either chicken 
out and say lame crap like ‘What if I said you are amazing,’ like I had over the years. Or, I could be a man 
and say what I really wanted to,, even if it meant she may never talk to me again. For once, I chose the 
latter option. ‘What would you do if I kissed you again?’ ‘Gopal!’ she said, her voice hushed. ‘Don’t sound 
so surprised. We did kiss, remember?’ ‘I don’t know what happened,’ she said. How could she not know 
what had occurred? ‘Don’t avoid the question,’ I said. ‘What?’ Aarti said, a rare hesitation in her voice. 
‘What would you do if I kissed you again?’ I repeated. ‘I don’t know,’ she said. She hadn’t said yes. 
However, she hadn’t hung up the phone in disgust either. ‘I might,’ I said. ‘Don’t!’ ‘I just might.’ ‘Can we 
talk about something else?’ she said.
‘Are we meeting?’ I said. ‘Where?’ she said. Again, no yes or no. She didn’t even say when. She simply 
asked the location. It meant she wanted to meet me. Even after I had warned her that I wanted to kiss her, 
she wanted to meet me. A dozen smileys filled up my head. ‘I’ll pick you up at work. What time do you get 
done?’ ‘Six. Not today though. Raghav has some friends over. First issue and all.’ ‘Party?’ ‘Kind of. A low-
key affair. Raghav doesn’t have money to party. Everything has gone into the paper.’ ‘You want me to give 
some money?’ I said, enjoying every syllable of my sentence. ‘Stop it, Gopal. So, tomorrow at six?’ ‘I will 
call you,’ I said. ‘Oh, okay. Where are we going?’ she said. ‘Somewhere private,’ I said. She paused for a 
second. ‘Where we can talk,’ I added. ‘Let me know then.’ You are in 2105, Mr Mishra’ I had booked a 
room at Ramada for five thousand a night. ‘Any help with your luggage, sir?’ the lady at the reception 
asked me. 1 only have this,’ I said, pointing to my rucksack. The receptionist smiled at me. She walked with 
me to the centre of the lobby and to the guest relations desk. ‘This is Aarti,’ the receptionist said, ‘and she 
will guide you to your room.’ Aarti looked up from her computer. Her jaw dropped. ‘Hello,’ I said as 
nonchalantly as possible.
‘Oh, hi... I mean, good evening,’ she said, flustered. ‘Aarti, this is Mr Gopal Mishra, director of GangaTech. 
He is in 2105. Please escort him to his room.’ ‘Sure, sure,’ Aarti said, still in shock. She stood up. We walked 
towards the elevator. A housekeeping staff member entered the elevator with us. We couldn’t talk. She 
only spoke in the second floor corridor. ‘Gopal, what are you doing here?’ she whispered. She continued to 
walk two steps ahead of me. I had my story ready. I couldn’t tell Aarti I had booked a room just for us. ‘We 
had a senior guest faculty coming from London.’ ‘So?’ ‘He cancelled last minute. We had already paid for 
the room. So I thought, why not enjoy the hospitality of Ramada?’ ‘What? You should have told me. I 
could have got you a refund.’ ‘Forget it. I have never stayed in a five-star hotel before. I’ll try it out.’ We 
reached 2105. She opened the room with the magnetic key card. She looked beautiful in her uniform, a 
formal sari, with her hair - every strand of it - locked in a bun. I dumped my rucksack on the bed. ‘You need 
help with the features of the room?’ she said. ‘No,’ I grinned. ‘Someone already showed me.’ ‘You are 
crazy, Gopal,’ she said. ‘Anyway, I better go.’ I sat on the single-seater sofa in the room. ‘Stay,’ I said. ‘I 
can’t. I am on duty.’ ‘After six? It’s five-thirty already,’ I said. ‘I can’t be in a guest’s room!’ ‘You know this 
guest,’ I said. ‘Two minutes?’ She went to the door and closed it as much as possible without locking it. She 
sat on a chair by the desk and stared at me.
‘What?’ I said. ‘You didn’t plan this?’ she said. ‘What plan? The faculty cancelled’ I said. ‘What’s the name 
of the faculty?’ she said. ‘Mr Allen,’ I said. ‘Oh, really? Which college?’ ‘He’s from ...’ I said and hesitated. 
‘See. Stop fibbing,’ she said. ‘How will I know the college? The dean would know. All I know is, we had a 
room, and I took it.’ She shook her head. ‘Let’s hang out here after you finish,’ I said. ‘How?’ she said. It’s 
not allowed.’ ‘You only do things you are allowed to?’ I said. ‘No,’ she said, ‘but...’ ‘You don’t have the 
guts,’ I said. ‘That’s not the case,’ she said and stood up. ‘And you know it.’ ‘Nobody will find out,’ I said. 
‘Finish work and come. We will eat here. Leave in an hour or so.’ ‘If room service sees me?’ she said. ‘You 
hide in the toilet when they come,’ I said. ‘That’s weird,’ she said. ‘Okay, I will order before you arrive. 
Sandwiches?’ She bit her lower lip and mused over my suggestion for a few seconds. ‘Fine,’ she sighed. 
‘But you have to check no staff is around when I come or leave.’ ‘Sure, I will stand in the corridor. Will give 
you the green signal on the phone.’ She walked to me and whacked me lightly on the side of my head. ‘The 
things you make me do!’ she
said and left the room. ? I ordered a club sandwich, chocolate cake and a bottle of wine. I also took a 
shower, using more shampoo and hot water than I normally do in a week. She called me at 6:30 p.m. 
‘Check the corridor.’ I came out of the room. ‘It’s fine,’ I said into the phone, turning my head left and 
right to scan the corridor. Two minutes later, we were both in the room with the door firmly locked. She 
had already changed into a white button down shirt and jeans downstairs after her shift. ‘You are stupid, 
you know that, right?’ she said, plonking herself on the bed and holding a hand dramatically to her chest. 
‘My heart is beating so fast!’ ‘Relax,’ I said. She laughed. ‘You are lucky they haven’t installed corridor 
CCTVs yet. Can’t pull this stunt after that.’ ‘So, right timing,’ I said. ‘Hungry?’ I opened the silver cover on 
the sandwich plate. ‘Starving,' she admitted. I added some french fries and salad to the sandwich. ‘Come, 
let’s eat.’ ‘I am too exhausted to move. I stood in heels for eight hours. Can I eat on the bed?’ ‘Sure,’ I 
said. I passed her the plate. I poured a glass of red wine. ‘You ordered a full bottle of wine?’ she said. I 
shrugged. ‘When did you start drinking wine?’ she said. ‘Shukla-ji made me try everything,’ I said. ‘You like 
wine?’ ‘I usually have whisky. But I thought you might like wine.’ ‘I do. But I shouldn’t drink. This is my 
place of work.’ ‘One glass ...’ I insisted.
She gave a brief nod and took the glass. ‘Raghav doesn’t drink much. He is such a bore sometimes,’ she 
said and took a sip. ‘Nice. What is it?’ ‘Jacobs Creek from Australia,’ I said, emphasising the country of 
origin. It had cost me two thousand bucks, but I didn’t mention the price. ‘It’s good. It will hit me soon.’ 
‘Relax, my driver will drop you home,’ I said. She held her sandwich tight with both hands and ate like a 
famine victim. ‘Slow down,’ I said. She said with food in her mouth, ‘I haven’t had anything since 
breakfast.’ ‘Even in school you used to stuff your face,’ I teased. ‘Provided you left any food for me!’ ‘Hey, 
I stole your tiffin once, and that too half of it. I am still serving my sentence,’ I said. ‘Oh, really?’ she said. 
‘The teacher punished you for only one period.’ ‘But I am still stuck with you,’ I said, looking totally 
depressed. She picked up a french fry from her plate and threw it at me. She missed. It fell on the sofa. 
‘Oops, pick it up, please. I can’t dirty my own hotel,’ she said. She kicked off her shoes and sat crosslegged 
on the bed. I went to pour her more wine. ‘I’ll get high,’ she said but extended her glass. She sipped and 
checked the time. The bedside clock said 8:30 p.m. ‘How long can you stay?’ I said. ‘Until nine,’ she said. 
‘Half an hour more.’ ‘Ten?’ I said. She shook her head. ‘Mom will ask a hundred questions. Unless ... I tell 
her I have to do a double shift,’ she said. ‘Tell her that,’ I said immediately.
‘I have to stay for eight more hours then. Till 2 a.m.’ ‘Perfect,’ I said. ‘Are you crazy?’ she said. ‘I cant be in 
your room till two!’ ‘Why not?’ I said. ‘When do we ever get to catch up like this?’ ‘If my boyfriend finds 
out ...’ she said and went quiet. She leaned back against the headboard. ‘Finds out what?’ I said. We had 
finished half the bottle. I poured myself some more wine. ‘That I am in another man’s room for so many 
hours, he will kill me,’ she finished. ‘He will?’ She grinned. ‘Not literally. But he would get, like, really mad. 
Break something.’ She picked up a pillow and threw it at me, playing the part of a possessive boyfriend. ‘He 
will kill you if he finds out it is me,’ I told her. ‘He’s not finding out,’ Aarti said. I got off the sofa and came 
next to the bed. ‘You are doing that double shift,’ I said, pointing to her phone. ‘You sure?’ she said. ‘I will 
eat your head till two in the morning!’ ‘That’s what you’ve done all your life,’ I said. She hit me with the 
other pillow. I caught it and kept it aside. She placed a finger on her lips, signalling me to be quiet. She 
called home. ‘Mom?’ she said. ‘Yes, I am still at work. Double shift, what to do?’ Her mother spoke for a 
few seconds. Aarti continued: ‘Stupid Bela was to do this shift. She has made some excuse for not coming. 
Ever since her engagement, she bunks so much.’ Her mother spoke again. Aarti looked irritated. ‘Why 
should I get engaged because Bela did? Yes ... I will one day, mom ... Okay, fine ... Yes, the hotel car will 
drop me ... Bye.’ She kept her phone on the bed, and looked exasperated.
‘You okay?’ I said. ‘I think at some point a switch flicks in the heads of Indian parents. From “study, study, 
study” they go “marry, marry, marry’’’ ‘You don’t want to?’ ‘I will,’ she said, and patted the bed. ‘Why are 
you standing like a show-piece?’ I sat on the bed, careful to sit a little away from her. ‘You are paying a lot 
for this room. Please be comfortable.’ ‘Huh?’ I said. ‘It’s my job to make our guests comfortable, she said 
and smiled a guest-relations smile. Even with the specks of red wine on her teeth, her smile was downright 
beautiful. I bent to take off my shoes and socks. ‘You don’t need to call Raghav?’ She shook her head. 'He 
won’t even realise it. He is working on a big story,’ she said. She poured herself some more wine. ‘If he 
calls?’ I said. She placed her hand on my mouth. ‘If he does, you go shh ... and I will deal with it,’ she said. 
Her touch was like a spark. She removed her hand. ‘So Mr Director, how is work, life, everything?’ 
‘Everything is work. It isn’t easy to run a college,’ I said. ‘Only work? ’ She imitated her mother, ‘What? You 
should get married. Why aren’t you married by now?’ We laughed and clinked our glasses together. ‘I will 
have to get engaged soon though,’ she said. ‘The pressure is building.’ ‘How about Raghav?’ I said. 
‘Obviously, he is not ready at the moment. He’ll do it if I push him,’ she said. ‘Are your parents okay with 
him?’ I said. ‘They love him. My father broke the family tradition of politics to join services. He admires 
Raghav’s passion.’
‘Even though he doesn’t make money?’ ‘He will. One day he will,’ Aarti vowed. ‘And why are you talking 
like my relatives?’ She picked up the remote and switched on the television. ‘This is so boring,’ she said and 
flicked through the news channels. She stopped at Channel V, where an item girl danced to a remixed 
video. ‘She has totally done her lips,’ she said, ‘and a nose job, and possibly a boob job.’ ‘What?’ I said, 
shocked at her choice of words. ‘Boob job. To fix your boobs, make them bigger,’ she said. I looked as 
shocked as I felt. ‘You are my best friend,’ she said and playfully punched my arm. ‘I can totally be myself 
with you.’ She flipped channels again and suddenly we were watching When Harry Met Sally from 
somewhere in the middle. ‘Men and women can’t be friends,’ Billy Crystal said to Meg Ryan, a toothpick in 
his mouth. ‘Of course, they can be. Look at us,’ Aarti said impatiently and increased the volume. ‘I love this 
movie.’ ‘You have seen it?’ I said. ‘Yeah, have you?’ I shook my head. I didn’t watch English movies. 
‘Come, let’s watch. I’ll tell you what happened so far.’ I moved closer to her. I dimmed the room lights 
from the bedside panel while she summarised the plot for me. Harry and Sally went about their lives, 
meeting and fighting several times but never really connecting even though it seemed obvious that they 
should. We watched the movie in silence. ‘Wow, we finished the bottle,’ she observed after a while. She 
lifted a pillow, placed it in my lap and rested her head there for the rest of the film. ‘You comfortable?’ she 
asked, looking up at me from my lap, her eyes twinkling in the TV light. I hesitated a little, then placed my 
hand lightly on her head and gently stroked her hair. She didn’t object. It felt wonderful to be with her. I 
couldn’t think of a happier moment than this in my life so far. ‘Aarti?’ I said.
‘Yeah?’ she said, her eyes still on the TV. ‘Is it okay for you to lie in my lap like this?’ She nodded, her eyes 
on the screen. ‘Why did you run away from the river that day?’ I said. ‘I don’t want to talk about it. Watch 
the movie, no,’ she said. ‘Will you run away again?’ I said, my voice heavy. She sensed the tension in me. 
She muted the television and sat up. ‘You okay, Gopi?’ she said, the words slightly slurred. The TV light 
flickered over our faces. ‘Run now if you want to,’ I said, my voice barely making it out of my throat. 
‘Because if you stay for a while in my life and then go ...’ I had spoken too much. The Australian wine had 
managed to open up an Indian heart. ‘Shut up,’ she said and placed her palm on my mouth again, ‘Drama 
queen. Sorry, drama king!’ But I meant it, I couldn’t bear to be away from her. ‘I am lonely too, Gopal,’ she 
said, ‘so lonely.’ ‘Why?’ ‘Raghav has no time. My parents can't see why I want to work. They can’t 
understand why the DM’s daughter has to slog. All my girlfriends are getting married, planning kids and I 
am not. I am weird.’ ‘You are different,’ I corrected her. ‘Why am I different? Why can’t I just be normal - 
satisfied to be at home, waiting for my husband?’ ‘That’s not normal. That’s backward.’ ‘Raghav stresses 
me out. I want to support him. But he can’t seem to get his act together. He rejected a tie-up with a 
newspaper for the sake of independence. How is he ever going to make money like this?’ ‘I thought you 
said he will one day,’ I said. ‘I put on a brave face. But I can discuss my fears with you, no?’ she said. ‘Of 
course, you can,’ I said and caressed her cheek.
We turned to the TV screen. One night Sally was feeling low. Harry comes over to her house. He comforts 
her. They end up kissing. I don’t know if the scene motivated me or the wine or the fact that I felt I might 
not get another chance. I leaned over to kiss Aarti. She looked up at me in surprise. However, she did not 
protest. Just stared. I kissed her again, this time more insistently. Nothing for two minutes and then she 
was kissing me back. We kissed again and again. I kissed her lips, her cheeks, her forehead, her nose, her 
ears and her lips again. I switched off the lights. When I hugged her again, she said, ‘This is wrong.’ ‘I 
know,’ I said, ‘but I can’t stop.’ My hand reached for her shirt buttons. ‘No,’ she said and gripped that hand 
hard. I slid my other hand under her shirt. Thank god, men have two hands; nobody could make out 
otherwise. My palm was, at last, on her breast. ‘Gopal, you realise what is happening?’ she said. I shook 
my head. ‘We shouldn’t...’ she said. I shut her up with another kiss. She wriggled a little, but I kept kissing 
her. She started to respond. Slow at first, then matching and finally outpacing me. ‘This isn’t right, Gopal,’ 
she panted, biting my lower lip. I answered in kisses. The movie had ended. I heard shampoo commercials 
in the background as I tugged at her top to take it off. ‘Don’t, Gopal!’ she whispered but raised her arms to 
make my job easier. I removed my shirt. This time when we embraced, her warmth and softness melted 
into me. ‘I care for you so much ...’ I said. ‘Stop talking,’ she said, interrupting my garbled speech. I gently 
pushed at her shoulders to make her lie back on the bed. I removed the rest of my clothes. She looked 
away. ‘What?’ I said. She shook her head, without making eye contact.
I slid next to her. She kissed me passionately, but whenever I paused to look into her eyes, she turned 
away. I reached down to unbutton her jeans. She halted me one last time. ‘I have a boyfriend,’ she 
reminded me. ‘I have lived with that for years,’ I said. ‘I am not that kind of girl, Gopal,’ she said on a sob. 
‘You are an amazing girl,’ I said, my finger dipping into her navel. I paused to kiss her there. ‘The most 
amazing girl in the world.’ I placed her hand on my body. I went back to undoing her jeans. Girls wear the 
most unremovable, tight jeans in the world. I found it impossible to take them off without her help. ‘Could 
you?’ I said, after a five-minute struggle. My request brought forth a giggle. She wriggled to take them off. 
I waited and then drew her close to me. ‘Gopal,’ she said, and held me close. Passion repressed for years 
came forth unleashed. I bit her and kissed her all the time that I was becoming one with her. I knew my life 
would no longer be the same again. What happened only magnified my love for her. They say men 
withdraw after sex. But I wanted to draw her close, cuddle and keep her with me forever. Spooning her 
tightly, I kissed her hair as she looked ahead with no particular expression. ‘You are wonderful, Aarti. Every 
bit of you is wonderful.’ She half-smiled. I raised myself on an elbow. ‘Did you like it?’ I said. She nodded 
but looked elsewhere. ‘Look at me,’ I said. She did turn her eyes to me, but looked past me. ‘Are you 
okay?’ I said. She nodded. We lay down again. A little red LED beeped on the ceiling. ‘What’s that?’ I said, 
worried it could be a camera.
‘Smoke alarm,’ she said. We remained silent for a few minutes. ‘I cant live without you, Aarti,’ I said. 
‘Don’t say that, please,’ she said. ‘Its true. I love you,’ I said. ‘Please, stop!’ she said and sat up on the bed, 
covering herself with the bedsheet. ‘What’s the matter?’ I said, holding her arm through the sheet. Her 
phone beeped. She looked at the message. She let out a deep breath as she punched a reply. ‘Can I wear 
my clothes?’ She slid away from me. ‘Huh?’ I said. ‘Sure.’ She draped the bedsheet around her, picked up 
her clothes and went to the bathroom. I switched on the lights. A confused mix of emotions stewed in me. 
She obviously cares for me, for no girl will do what she did otherwise. Yet, why was she acting distant? 
Does she expect me to tell her I will be there for her now? Or is she regretting it? Is this going to bring us 
closer or take us further apart? I was naked and confused. I couldn’t resolve my confusion, but I could at 
least wear my clothes. She re-entered the room while I was buttoning my shirt. ‘I better go home,’ she said 
decisively. The bedside clock said 0:00 a.m. ‘Don’t you have to stay till 2 a.m.?’ I asked. ‘I’ll say the shift 
ended earlier. In either case, they would be too sleepy to check the time now,’ she said. Sit with me, I 
wanted to say. I wanted to talk. I wanted her to know how much this meant to me. Isn’t this what girls 
want, any way, to talk? ‘Will you call your driver?’ she said. ‘Stay for five minutes,’ I begged. ‘Please?’ She 
moved to the sofa. I sat on the bed. ‘Why are you so tense?’ I said. ‘I am your Gopal. Don’t you care for 
me?’
‘You still need proof?’ she asked. I came next to her. I held her hand. It felt cold. ‘I don’t want you to feel 
ashamed about it,’ I said. ‘This is special. We have to be proud of it.’ ‘But I am in a relationship,’ she said. 
‘With a guy who is never there for you?’ I said. She turned to me in surprise. ‘I haven’t ever commented 
about you and Raghav. That doesn’t mean I don’t notice. Aarti, you deserve better. You deserve all the 
joys of life.’ ‘I am a simple girl, Gopal,’ Aarti said, biting her lip. ‘Even a simple girl needs love, security, 
attention, support. Right?’ I said. She kept quiet. ‘The simple girl will get married someday. She will need to 
know if her husband will be able to raise a family with her,’ I said. I had remained defensive for years. With 
Aarti by my side, I felt confident to go on the offensive. ‘I am tired. I want to go home,’ she said and stood 
up. I called my driver. I offered to come down with her. She declined. She came close to me before she 
left. I expected a kiss but there was only a brief hug. The door shut behind her. Her scent lingered in the 
room for hours and in my heart for days. We didn’t talk to each other for two days after the Ramada night. 
I couldn’t control myself any longer and finally called her. She couldn’t speak to me as her parents were 
around her. However, she agreed to meet me at CCD the next morning before work. ‘I am sorry I freaked 
out’ she said, taking little sips from her extra-hot black coffee. She wore a crinkly purple skirt and a white 
printed top. Her wet hair told me she had just taken a shower. ‘I have twenty minutes before I leave for 
work,’ she said. ‘What happened to you that night?’ I said. ‘Well, you know what happened,’ she said. ‘You 
have to come to me, Aarti,’ I said. I placed my hand on hers. ‘Gopal!’ she said, and pulled her hand away.
‘What?’ I said. I wanted her to look at me with shy eyes, smile at our shared experience, and squeeze my 
hand tight. None of it happened. ‘People know us,’ she said instead. Steam from our coffee cups rose 
between us. The cafe felt warm, compared to the chilly December morning outside. ‘Do you love me?’ I 
said, desperate for her confirmation. She had to love me. How could she not? Aarti let out a breath of 
frustration. ‘What is the matter with you? At least accept your feelings now,’ I said. ‘Do you want to know 
what I feel?’ she said. ‘More than anything else,’ I said. ‘Guilt,’ she said. ‘Why?’ I said, almost in protest. 
‘Wasn’t it wonderful? Isn’t this love?’ ‘Gopal, you have to stop using the word “love”, okay?’ she said. Girls 
cannot be understood. Period. I became quiet. ‘Raghav did me no wrong,’ she spoke after a minute, 
staring outside the window. ‘So this is about Raghav ...’ I said as she cut me. ‘Can you listen? Simply listen, 
okay?’ she said, her gaze stern. I had to comply. Men are born on earth to listen to girls. So, I nodded. ‘He 
only wanted to make a living while doing the right thing. It’s not easy,’ she said. I nodded again, hoping like 
hell I didn’t come across as fake. ‘I shouldn’t have cheated on him. I am a terrible person.’ I nodded again. 
‘You think I am a terrible person?’ she said. I kept quiet. ‘Say something,’ she shouted. ‘You told me to 
listen,’ I said. ‘So do that,’ she said.
‘What?’ I said. ‘Say something,’ she said. There’s something about male-female conversation. I don’t think 
one side ever gets what the other side intends. ‘Aarti, you are a sensible girl. You don’t do stuff unless you 
want to.’ ‘What are you trying to say?’ she said. ‘You never said yes to me despite my attempts for years. 
Something made you do it that night.’ ‘I made a mistake,’ she said. I must admit, her saying this felt like 
crap. The most special day of my life classified as a mistake for her. I controlled my anger. ‘Was it? Why 
did you come to meet me today?’ I said. ‘It’s just coffee,’ she said, her eyes shifty. ‘Aarti, don’t lie. Not to 
me. If your feelings have changed, there’s nothing to be ashamed of,’ I said. Tears rolled down her cheeks. 
I picked up a tissue and leaned forward to wipe them. She looked around, and composed herself. ‘Gopal, in 
every relationship, there is a weaker person and there is a stronger person. The weaker person is the one 
who needs the other person more.’ ‘True,’ I said. ‘It’s not easy being the weaker one in the relationship. 
Not all the time,’ she said. ‘I know the feeling,’ I said. She looked at me. ‘I am sorry. I am listening,’ I said. 
‘My parents are pressurising me to get married. I can’t fight them forever,’ she said. ‘Raghav doesn’t seem 
to understand that.’ ‘He doesn’t want to marry you?’ I said. ‘Only in a couple of years. He avoids the topic. 
Sometimes it is about not being settled, sometimes about work being too dangerous, mostly he is too 
busy. What about me?’ I nodded. Sometimes your best chance with women lies in adequate nods. I made 
mine just right, with a measured swinging of the head.
‘He loves me, I know. Every now and then, he sends a sweet SMS. It’s nice.’ I realised she was thinking 
aloud. I pretended to listen but focused on her triangular purple earrings that bounced mildly when she 
spoke. She finished her pros and cons after five minutes. ‘Thanks for listening,’ she said. ‘Why me?’ I said. 
‘What do you mean?’ she said. ‘Why did you sleep with me? Sure, you had some problems with Raghav. 
But why me?’ She looked at me. She had softened a little after venting out. ‘Because I like you,’ she said. 
‘You do?’ I said. ‘Of course, I do. And I know what I mean to you. I swear I would be so happy if you found 
another girl.’ ‘I can’t,’ I said. ‘Can’t what?’ ‘I cant be with another girl. It’s you or nobody,’ I said, looking 
her straight in the eye. ‘You realise how guilty that makes me feel?’ she said. ‘So you feel guilty if you sleep 
with me and if you don’t?’ She gave a wry smile. ‘Its not easy being a girl. We feel guilty about everything.’ 
‘Don’t be confused. Come to me,’ I said. ‘What about Raghav?’ she said. ‘He needs me at this stage.’ ‘He 
does what he wants to. Why shouldn’t you?’ ‘That’s work. He never stops me from work. Infidelity is 
different.’ ‘You inspire me, Aarti,’ I said. ‘I can’t tell you how much I want to do in life if you are by my side. 
I want to expand my college. We can open an aviation academy, MBA, maybe medicine.’ ‘You don’t need 
me for that,’ she said. ‘I want you for myself. Without you, there is no me,’ I said. ‘People break up all the 
time, Aarti. You guys are not married. We will be so happy.’
‘And Raghav?’ she said. ‘He will be fine. He’ll find someone, a journalist or activist or something,’ I said. 
She laughed. ‘What?’ I said. ‘I like you, Gopal. But why do you try so hard?’ ‘Sorry,’ I said stiffly. ‘I don’t 
have the right moves or the right lines all the time.’ ‘Shut up, this isn’t about the moves.’ ‘Will you be 
mine?’ I said, extending my hand. ‘Please don’t pressurise me.’ I took my hand back. ‘Not at all,’ I said. She 
checked the time. She had to leave. I called my driver, who slowly rolled up in a black Mercedes. ‘Wow!’ 
she said. ‘Is that yours?’ ‘No, it belongs to the trust. It is for Shukla-ji. We just took delivery.’
We got into the car. The black leather felt warm. ‘It’s got seat heaters,’ I said, showing her the controls. 
‘One day, Mr Gopal, you will have your own,’ she said as we reached the hotel. ‘Car or girl?’ I winked at 
her. ‘Both, hopefully,’ she said and winked back. ‘When can we meet,’ I said, ‘alone?’ ‘Gopal!’ ‘We don’t 
have to do anything. In fact, I don’t want to do anything.’ ‘Famous last words from every guy,’ she said 
and walked into the hotel. Guards saluted the black Mercedes as it drove out of the hotel gate.                                                         
? ‘Where are your parents?’ She drew the curtains in her room. ‘Hospital. It’s dad’s knees again.’ Aarti and 
I continued to meet, though seldom in public places. Mostly, she would call me home when her parents 
were out. Even with half a dozen servants in the house, her room had privacy. Two months had passed 
since the night at Ramada. Her guilt for cheating on Raghav had subsided somewhat, or at least she hid it 
well from me. I stopped asking her if she loved me as it only moved her away from me. Girls are 
contradictory. They will say they like communication, but on certain topics they clam up. If they like you, 
they would prefer you sense it rather than make them say it. ‘Grapes?’ she said as she offered me a tray of 
fruit. ‘Feed me,’ I said as I sprawled out on her easy chair. ‘Shut up,’ she said and shoved the tray towards 
me. She sat on the chair across me. We had an unwritten rule - we stayed away from her bed. ‘Once?’ I 
said. ‘What is this?’ she said and stood up. She picked up a bunch of grapes and brought it close to my 
mouth. As I parted my lips, she pushed the whole bunch inside. ‘That’s not how you feed kings’ I said, 
struggling to talk as juices squirted from my mouth.
‘All you boys are the same. First you chase, but when you get the girl, you want to be kings,’ she said. ‘You 
are my queen, my dear,’ I said. ‘Cheesy. Corny. Horrible,’ she said. I gave her a grape-stained kiss. ‘The 
maids are around!’ ‘They knock. You know that,’ I said. I wanted to kiss her again, but she pushed me 
away. ‘I am horrible to you, isn’t it?’ she said. ‘It’s okay,’ I said. ‘Too much physical stuff messes up my 
head. You don’t want me to be low for weeks, right?’ ‘It’s okay, I don’t want to either,’ I said. ‘Really?’ she 
said, surprised. Guys always want to do things. Yet, she knew I wasn’t lying. I had never asked her to come 
to my campus where we could be totally alone. Neither had I attempted another Ramada-like rendezvous. 
‘Really,’ I said, my tone serious. ‘You don’t want to?’ she said. She was wearing a saffron salwar and a 
white kameez. I wanted her more than any woman, or for that matter anything, in the world. Still, I had a 
condition. ‘Not until Raghav is out of your system,’ I said. ‘What?’ she said. "That night at Ramada I had 
your body, not your soul. I don’t want it to be like that again.’ ‘You don’t get people out of your system 
overnight,’ she said. ‘I know. But are you trying?’ ‘I don’t know,’ she said. ‘No matter how much I deny it, 
the fact is I meet you almost everyday.’ She sat on the armrest of my chair. ‘So, are you ready to call it off 
with him?’ I said.
As I finished my sentence, her phone rang. ‘It’s him,’ she said. I became quiet. ‘Hey’ she said to him. She 
sat close enough for me to hear Raghav's voice on the other end. ‘We hit five thousand copies,’ he was 
saying. ‘Congratulations!’ Aarti said. ‘We will get proper brands to advertise soon. What are you doing?’ ‘I 
came home early,’ Aarti said. ‘Parents?’ ‘Mom’s taken dad to the hospital. His knees are killing him. He’ll 
have to replace both of them.’ ‘That’s awful,’ he said. I played with Aarti’s hair as she spoke to Raghav. 
She made a face at me to make me stop. I didn’t. ‘So what else? Doing anything in the evening?’ she said. 
‘Finalising the big Monday issue. It’s going to be crazy’ he said. ‘Okay,’ Aarti sighed. I brushed back the hair 
falling on her face. She grabbed my hand as she spoke. ‘I could meet you for a midnight coffee,’ Raghav 
said. ‘Have to be with dad. And every time I go out late, mom wants to get me married the next week.’ 
'You are so young,’ Raghav said. ‘My family doesn’t get all that. Cousins my age are married,’ she said. 
‘Can we not start a fight again?’ Raghav said. ‘I’m exhausted.’ ‘I’m not,’ Aarti said. ‘I love you, bye,’ 
Raghav said smartly. ‘Do you?’ Aarti said. ‘Aarti, c’mon. I have to hang up. I do love you. Say it, no,’ 
Raghav said. ‘Love you. Bye,’ she said. I withdrew my hand from her face.
‘What?’ she said. ‘This is what I mean by getting him out of your system,’ I said. ‘It was just a simple chat,’ 
she said. ‘You said “love”. With me you don’t like that word.’ ‘I wanted to be normal. That’s how we end 
calls,’ she said. She walked up to the window and stared outside. ‘I’m sorry, it’s not easy hearing you say 
that to another man,’ I said. ‘It’s not easy being a cheat,’ she said and turned all teary-eyed. I took her in 
my arms. ‘At some point he will find out,’ Aarti said, her face buried in my chest. ‘I just want to tell him 
myself.’ ‘Will you be with me?’ I said. She gave a barely perceptible nod, without lilting her face. ‘I will love 
you forever, Aarti,’ I said. She hugged me tight. After a while she looked at me. ‘Should I tell him?’ she said. 
I shook my head. ‘I will,’ I said. I wanted to rub it in his face. It took just a mini-van to move my stuff from 
my old house to the brand new directors bungalow. I had clothes, my father’s old books and family 
pictures. The contractor purchased the rest. I didn’t need a three-bedroom duplex bungalow, but the 
director couldn’t hole up in a hostel room. I stood in the lawns of the new house, supervising the move 
early morning. A truck with the new purchases furniture, carpets, appliances, utensils and furnishings - 
drove into the compound. A labourer held up some old photographs of my father. ‘Where should I keep 
these?’ he said. In one framed picture Baba sat under a tree smoking a hookah and watching the fields. I, 
all of five years, sat naked next to him. My father’s farmer friend had taken that black and white picture 
with a camera his son had sent him from abroad. I picked up that picture and saw my father’s face. Unlike 
the Baba I remembered, the person in the picture looked young and healthy. I saw the tree and tried to 
gauge its location in the current campus. I couldn’t. I hadn’t cried over my father once in the four years 
after his funeral. Yet, I didn’t know why I felt so overwhelmed that day. Baba would’ve loved to see me 
move into such a big house. He probably died thinking his loser son would never get anywhere in life. If 
only he could see this! Gopal doesn’t cry.
Gopal fights the world, a voice inside told me. ‘Put them up in the front room,’ I said. We finished the 
move by ten in the morning. My first guest, I had planned, would be the person who made this possible - 
Shukla-ji. I had invited him for lunch. I hurried the hostel chef. The gas stove at my new home didn’t work, 
and the chef wanted to go to the hostel kitchen to prepare the dishes. ‘Bring the stove here!’ I shouted. 
‘MLA sir is coming. I can’t trust the hostel cooking.’ Of course, I also wanted Aarti to be one of my first 
guests. However, I had promised myself that Aarti would come to my new house as my girlfriend, not 
someone else’s girlfriend having a parallel affair with me. She SMSed me: 'How's the move gng? When do i 
c the place?' I replied: 'U can come anytime but i won't let u leave. Let me meet Raghav first.' 'R u sure? 
Am so nervous about u meeting him.' I was composing a reply to her when my phone rang. I picked up 
Shukla-ji’s call. ‘Sir, we are making puris. Come hungry, okay?’ I said. ‘Come home, Gopal,’ he said. ‘I am 
home. My new home. I mean, this is also your home.’ ‘I’m screwed,’ Shukla-ji said, his voice unusually 
tense. ‘What?’ ‘Come to my place. Your fucker friend, I wont spare him. Come right now.’ ‘What 
happened? We have lunch ...’ I was saying but he cut the call. The chef arrived panting at my house, 
carrying the heavy stove on his shoulders. ‘It will take only an hour,’ he said reassuringly to me. ‘Lunch has 
been cancelled,’ I said and walked out of the house. My phone beeped. Another SMS from Aarti. 'U should 
let me decorate the house. After all, hotel industry & all.' 1 sent her a smiley and kept the phone back in my 
pocket.
‘MLA Shukla’s place,’ I told the driver.                                                                  ? MLA Shukla’s men stood in a 
circle in Shukla-ji’s verandah. They looked mournful, as if someone had just died. Pink-coloured papers lay 
strewn on the coffee table. ‘Where’s Shukla sir?’ I said. One of his party workers pointed to his office. 
‘Wait here. He is on an important call,’ he said. ‘What happened?’ I said. The party worker did not respond. 
He looked pointedly at the pink papers. I picked one up. Revolution 2020> said the masthead, as pompous 
as ever. A miniature map of India, showing the socalled command centres of the revolution, was the logo. 
‘MLA makes money by making holy river filthy!’ said the headline. A poor quality, black and white picture 
of Shukla-ji occupied a quarter of the page. ‘Rs 25 crores sanctioned for Dimnapura Sewage Treatment 
Plant. MLA pockets Rs 20 crore,’ said the sub-headline. ‘These are all old, done to death, bullshit 
allegations, right?’ I said. Raghav liked to stir things up, but surely nobody would give a fuck about his rag. 
No one in the room responded to me. Half the party workers couldn’t read the paper anyway. The others 
seemed too scared to talk. I read on. Early Monday morning in Navabaga, a group of children walk 
towards their school waist-deep in sewage water. It is a gut-wrenching sight to see filthy water 
everywhere. Stink pervades the air. People of the neighbourhood don’t know what happened. They do 
know that this hadn’t happened before the government implemented the Ganga Action Plan (GAP). Yes, 
the same plan meant to clean up our holy river has ended up spreading more filth around our city. How? 
Well, because none of the projects meant to clean up the river were implemented. The Navabaga flooding 
apart, the river is filthier than ever. To give you an idea, the presence of fecal coliform, a form of bacteria, 
should not be more than 2,000 units/litre. At the ghats, the fecal coliform levels are 1,500,000 units/litre. 
Not only is our river dirty, we are living with serious health hazards. I saw Shukla-ji come out of his office. I 
rushed to him. He signalled me to wait and I saw that he was still on the phone. He picked up a few files 
and returned to the office. I continued to read. Revolution 2020 found many truths about the GAP scam. 
However, the most shocking one is about MLA Raman Lai Shukla’s Dimnapura Sewage Treatment Plant in 
Varanasi. Built at a cost of ?25 crores, the plant remained dysfunctional for years. When finally made 
operational, it never cleaned the water.
We have startling facts, with proof, on what happened inside the plant. ‘The opposition has done this,’ one 
party worker said to another. I sat down to finish the article. When untreated water reached the plant, 
eighty per cent of it was diverted downstream into the Varuna river, and dumped right back without any 
cleaning. The remaining twenty per cent of water was released at Dimnapura plants own exit, untreated. 
When the inspectors took the input and output measurements at points before and after the plant, it 
showed an eighty per cent drop in pollutants. Meanwhile, the water dumped into the Varuna river met the 
Ganga a few kilometres later. The net effect - no treatment of water at all and the river remaining as 
polluted as ever. Shukla took credit for the plant showing an eighty per cent drop in pollutants. The 
construction company, AlliedCon, is owned by the MLA’s uncle, Roshan Shulda, who made fake invoices 
for pumps that were never purchased (scans below) . ‘We will kill this newspaper,’ a party worker 
whispered in my ear as he saw me read with such concentration. The bottom of the page had several 
images. These included fake invoices for pumps amounting to Rs 15 crores. However, the actual site 
pictures showed no such pumps installed. A scanned letter from the pump manufacturer showed they 
never supplied the pumps. The ownership structure of AlliedCon confirmed links to Shukla-ji’s family. 
Finally, the paper had a picture of the Varuna river, with a dot to show the exact point where the effluents 
were released. ‘The CM is coming down from Lucknow,’ a party worker announced and worried murmurs 
rippled around the room. I could tell Raghav had worked hard on the story. He had suffered earlier for 
doing a story without evidence. This time he had left nothing to chance. The fake invoices, contractor-MLA 
link, and the audacity to dump the dirty water right back into the revered Ganga didn’t spell good news for 
Shuklaji. Locals would be livid. A politician stealing is bad enough, but to rob from the holy river is the 
worst sin. ‘It’s not even a real newspaper,’ Shukla-ji’s PA was discussing the matter with someone. ‘Couple 
of thousand copies, nobody will pay attention to it.’ The low circulation of Revolution 2020 had become 
the MLA’s only hope. Party workers had removed as many copies from the newsstands as they could. 
However, Revolution 2020 came free, like a brochure inside newspapers. It would be impossible to get rid 
of it completely. Aarti was calling. I stepped out to the lawns. ‘Saw R2020 today?’ she said. I didn’t know 
the paper had an acronym.
‘I have it in my hand,’ I said. She breathed audibly before she spoke again. ‘Is it too much?’ she said. I 
sneered, ‘It’s Raghav. When is he not too much?’ ‘It is shocking, isn’t it? They dump the dirty water 
elsewhere in the river and claim to have cleaned it!’ ‘He is taking on big people. He should be careful.’ ‘But 
he is only speaking the truth. Someone has to stand up for the truth.’ ‘I just said he needs to be careful,’ I 
said. ‘I don’t want him to be in trouble,’ she said, scared. ‘He doesn’t like to stay out of it,’ I replied. ‘Is he 
in trouble?’ she said, pausing after every word. ‘How would I know?’ I said. I heard the noise of traffic 
outside the house. ‘C’mon, Gopal, you and MLA Shukla she said and paused. ‘I’m not involved in any scam, 
okay?’ I screamed. Horns blared outside as I walked towards the gate. ‘I didn’t say that,’ she said softly. ‘I 
just don’t want Raghav to be in danger. I may not be faithful to him, but I don’t want him to get hurt.’ 
‘Hold on for a second, Aarti,’ I said. I came to the gate. My eyes popped as I saw the scene. Six vans from 
different TV channels had parked themselves outside the house. The guards were struggling to keep the 
reporters out, as they stood there airing live with the MLAs house as backdrop. ‘What’s going on?’ I asked 
the guard. ‘They want to come in,’ the guard said. ‘They know the CM is coming.’ ‘Everything okay?’ Aarti 
asked anxiously on the phone. ‘Yeah, so far.’ ‘Promise me Raghav won’t get hurt.’
‘It’s not in my hands, Aarti,’ I said, exasperated. ‘I don’t even know what will happen. It’s a small paper. 
Maybe the story will die.’ ‘It won’t,’ she said. ‘What?’ ‘All the mainstream newspapers and channels are in 
Revolution 2020’s office,’ she said. ‘Fuck,’ I said, as a fleet of white Ambassador cars approached the 
house. Photographers went berserk as they took pictures of everyone around, including me. ‘Will Raghav 
be okay? Promise me.’ ‘Aarti, I have to go.’ I jogged back to the house. 32 Everyone stood in attention as 
the CM entered the house. The aura of power could be sensed along every inch of the ML As bungalow. 
Shukla-ji came running and greeted the CM with folded hands. ‘Who called the media?’ the CM said, his 
voice purposeful. ‘What?’ Shukla-ji said, as clueless as anyone else in the room. ‘Let’s go inside,’ the CM 
said. The two leaders disappeared into MLA Shukla’s office. The CM’s minions mixed with the MLA’s 
minions in the hall. Even the minions maintained a hierarchy. The CM’s minions stood with their heads held 
high, while the MLA’s minions looked at the floor. I didn’t fit in anywhere. I sat on a wooden chair in the 
corner of the room. ‘Gopal,’ Shukla -ji’s booming voice startled me. I looked up. He asked me to come into 
his office. Once in, the MLA shut the door. ‘Gopal, sir. He runs my college, my trusted man. Bright and ...’ 
‘You know the person who did it?’ the CM asked me, with no interest in my qualities or capabilities. 
‘Raghav Kashyap, sir. Friend once, not anymore.’ ‘You couldn’t shut him up?’ the CM said. ‘We had him 
fired from Dainik. He started his own rag after that,’ I said. ‘Nobody cares about it.’
‘The media has sniffed it out. The rag doesn’t matter much, but if he gives interviews or provides all the 
evidence to the media, it is going to be bad’ ‘He is already doing that,’ I said. Both of them looked at me 
with accusing eyes. ‘My sources told me. I am not in touch with him,’ I clarified. ‘We can’t handle him?’ the 
CM asked. ‘How can you open a college without handling people?’ I understood what he meant by 
‘handling’. ‘He can’t be bought, sir,’ I said. For a second I felt proud of Raghav. It felt like a good thing to 
be someone who can’t be bought. ‘What do you mean by cant be? Everyone has a price,’ the CM said. ‘He 
doesn’t,’ I said. ‘I have known him for years. He’s mad.’ ‘Well, he does want to live, doesn’t he?’ Shukla-ji 
said. I noticed his eyes were red. I looked at the CM. He shook his head. ‘Shukla-ji is not in the right frame 
of mind,’ he said. ‘No, CM sir, I will not...’ Shukla-ji began. ‘Calm down, Shukla-ji,’ the CM said, his voice 
loud. ‘Do you have any idea what has happened?’ The MLA looked down. ‘You didn’t even make a plant? 
Ten per cent here and there doesn’t matter. But what were you thinking shoving the dirty water into 
Varuna? This is Mother Ganga. People will kill us,’ the CM said. I offered to leave the room but the CM told 
me to sit right there. ‘We have elections next year. Raman, I have always respected your space and never 
interfered. But this will take us down.’ ‘I will fix it, CM sir,’ Shukla said, ‘I will, I promise you.’ ‘How? By 
killing the journalist?’ ‘I said it in anger,’ Shukla-ji said, his tone apologetic. ‘Anger makes people do a lot of 
unpredictable things. It makes voters throw out governments. I know when a scam report has teeth, and 
when it doesn’t. This one does’
‘Tell me what to do, sir,’ Shukla-ji said, ‘And I will do it.’ ‘Resign,’ the CM said and got up to leave. ‘What?’ 
Shukla-ji said, his face looking bleached. ‘It’s not personal. Resign with grace and maybe you will come 
back.’ ‘Else?’ the MLA said after a pause. ‘Don’t make me fire you, Shukla. You are a friend,’ the CM said. 
‘But the party is above friendship.’ Realisation slowly dawned on Shukla-ji. He clenched his fists in anger. ‘It 
happens. You will be back,’ the CM said. He then walked out briskly with his minions. Hie press was waiting 
outside for the CM to give a statement. I followed the CM’s workers to the gate. ‘I came for a routine 
visit,’ the CM told the reporters. ‘What is your view on the Dimnapura Plant scam?’ a reporter shouted 
hoarsely. ‘I am not fully aware of the situation. It looks like a smear campaign. Our party is clear on 
corruption. Even if there are allegations, we ask our leaders to step down.’ The CM jostled past the 
reporters and sat in his car. ‘So will MLA Shukla resign?’ one of the reporters managed to jam the mike 
close to the CM’s face. ‘That is for him to decide,’ the CM said, hinting at the inevitable. The CM’s car left. 
I wondered what would happen to my GangaTech. I went back to Shukla-ji’s room. ‘We will destroy the 
newspaper office,’ a party worker was saying to Shukla-ji. Shukla-ji did not respond. ‘Tell us what to do, 
Shukla-ji. What did CM sir say?’ another minion said. ‘Leave me alone,’ Shukla-ji said. Party workers got the 
message. They scuttled away within seconds. Soon only he and I remained in his big house. ‘Sir?’ I said. ‘Do 
you need me?’ Shukla-ji looked at me. He no longer had his trademark ramrod posture. He slouched on the 
sofa,
elbow on the armrest and face in his palm. ‘The CM is a behenchod,’ he said. I kept quiet. ‘When he 
needed his election funding, he came to me. I did his dirty work, distributing liquor all over the state. Now 
he screws me.’ ‘You will come out of it, Shukla-ji, you always do.’ ‘Nobody gives a fuck about cleaning the 
Ganga. Everyone made money on that plan. So why me? I didn’t have an answer. I felt a tinge of guilt. 
Maybe Raghav did it to Shukla-ji because he wanted to get even with me. Or maybe it was my imagination. 
Raghav would expose anyone he could. ‘You run GangaTech properly, okay? I don’t want any mud from 
here to reach there,’ he said. ‘Of course, sir,’ I said. ‘Anyway, you are here, sir. We have big growth plans’ 
‘They’ll lock me up,’ he said calmly, decades in politics making him wise enough to forecast events. 
‘What?’ I said, shocked. ‘Once I resign, I have no power. Many MLAs have made money in the GAP scam. 
Before it spreads, they will lock me up to show they have taken action.’ ‘You are the MLA, Shukla-ji. The 
police cannot touch you,’ I said. ‘They will if the CM asks them. I will go in for a while. Pay my dues if I ever 
want a comeback.’ The thought of my father-figure and mentor going to jail unsettled me. I had very few 
people in life 1 could call my own. Shukla-ji counted as one of them. ‘Wait here,’ Shukla-ji said and got up. 
He went into his bedroom and returned with a set of keys. ‘Keep it,’ he said. ‘I can’t be seen with such 
flashy stuff.’ I picked up the keys. They belonged to the black Mercedes. ‘Your new car? I can’t.’ I placed 
the keys back on the table. ‘Keep it for me. You are like my son. I will also move some money into the 
trust. Make the college big’ ‘Alone? How can I do that alone?’ I said, my voice choked. ‘You haven’t even 
come to my house.’ ‘I can’t step out of here. My relatives are waiting outside with their cameras’ he said.
Shukla-ji spent the next hour explaining to me his various bank accounts and businesses. He had his people 
running them, but he was telling me in case of an emergency. ‘GangaTech is my cleanest business, and can 
aid my comeback one day.’ He wrote out his resignation in front of me and asked me to fax it to Lucknow. 
The fax machine beeped as the transmission started. ‘He fucked us, eh?’ Shukla-ji said. ‘Who?’ I said. ‘Your 
friend. I had him fired. He got me fired.’ ‘He tried to ruin my life. I will ruin his life,’ I vowed. Every 
newspaper of Varanasi city carried the Dimnapura Plant scam story on the front page the next morning. 
Shukla-ji, whose resignation became public, had become the new villain in town and Raghav Kashyap the 
new hero. Everyone spoke highly of the stupid pink paper. Local television channels covered the scam for 
hours on end. I flicked through the channels on my new forty-inch LCD television. I paused when I saw 
Raghav being interviewed. ‘It took us two months of secret work to get all the evidence on the scam. 
Everyone knew this MLA was shady, but there just wasn’t proof. Our team did it,’ Raghav said smugly. He 
had lost weight, and looked sleep-deprived with his unshaven face and dishevelled hair. Yet, he had a glint 
in his eye. ‘Who is your team?’ the reporter asked him. ‘Well, we are a small newspaper called Revolution 
2020. There are four of us, including me. We don’t have much experience but we are passionate about our 
work.’ ‘What are you passionate about?’ ‘Making a difference. Changing India for the better. That is what 
we live for,’ Raghav said. ‘Is it true that you believe India will have a revolution in the year 2020?’ ‘Yes, but 
we all have to work towards it and make sacrifices for it.’ ‘What exactly will the revolution be for?’ ‘A 
society where truth, justice and equality are respected more than power. Such societies progress the 
most.’ ‘Can you explain that?’ ‘Power-driven societies resemble animal societies. “Might is right” is the 
rule of the jungle and
applies to beasts. And beasts do not progress, humans do.’ I turned off the TV. I couldn’t take his bullshit 
anymore. Neither could Shukla’s men. Nitesh, one of the party workers, called me in the morning. ‘You 
smashed what?’ I said on the phone. ‘His only computer is in pieces. We took hammers and broke the 
printing press too.’ ‘Nobody saw you?’ ‘We went at night. Ransacked the office. Bastard. He’s finished.’ I 
got ready for work. I saw the Mercedes parked outside. I had a less than 300-yard commute to the office. 
Yet, I wanted to go in my new car. I thought about Raghav. After yesterday’s bravado and all that 
attention, a plundered office was all he was left with. He had no job, no business and soon nobody would 
give a fuck about his paper after this story died. ‘Where, sir?’ the driver said. ‘Office,’ I said. I made up 
dialogues to say to Raghav in my head. ‘The average-looking dumb Gopal Mishra, the boy you had 
preached to, saying, “you can try again next year", is sitting in a Mercedes. You have a broken printing 
press. And you think you are handsome, right? Well, soon I will make your girlfriend mine. The girl you 
stole from me! ‘Sir,’ the driver prompted. We had reached office. I entered my office. I sank into the 
leather chair and closed my eyes. I visualised Raghav’s face when I told him, ‘Aarti is with me.’ It would be 
amazing. I had planned it all. I would go to his office. I would drop the Mercedes keys on his table. I even 
had some lines ready. ‘Sometimes losers get ahead in life. Never forget that,’ I said out loud, to practise 
for D-day. I still didn’t have the right lines to break the news about Aarti being mine. I decided to try a 
couple of them. ‘Buddy, I am sorry to say this but Aarti is mine,’ I mumbled. That didn’t sound manly 
enough. ‘Aarti and I are a couple. Just wanted you to know,’ I tried a casual one. Couldn’t quite pull it off.
How do you come up with a suitable sentence to convey something you have meant to say for years? I 
wanted my words to bomb-blast him, to hit him like a lethal weapon. 1 wanted him to know that he had 
made me feel inadequate all my life. I wanted him to burn with jealousy seeing my car, my life, and hurt 
like hell for losing the girl he stole from me. I wanted to tell him ‘I am better than you, asshole,’ without 
actually saying it. Aarti’s call disrupted my thoughts. ‘They attacked his office,’ she said, her voice 
disturbed. ‘Oh, really?’ I acted surprised. ‘Revolution 2020 cant be published. The press is broken,’ she said. 
I scanned the files on my desk. I didn’t care if the stupid rag came out or not. ‘You there?’ Aarti said. ‘MLA 
Shukla could be jailed,’ I said. ‘He should, isn’t it? He stole money and dirtied the river.’ ‘Are you on his side 
or mine?’ I said to Aarti, irritated. ‘What? How is this about sides?’ she said. ‘Are you with me?’ I said. 
‘Huh?’ she said. ‘Are you?’ ‘Yes. But shouldn’t we wait to tell Raghav till he settles down?’ ‘Will he ever 
settle down?’ I said. She went quiet. ‘Come home,’ I said. ‘Your place?’ she said. ‘You are finally showing 
me your new home?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Tomorrow? I have a morning shift, will be done by three.’ ‘I’ll send my car,’ I 
said. I kept one eye on the TV and another on the porch as I waited for the Mercedes to arrive with Aarti. 
The afternoon rain had slowed down traffic, and the car took longer than it should have. Images of
Shukla-ji’s arrest flickered on TV. ‘I have done no wrong. I will be out soon,’ he proclaimed on one of the 
channels. He had pre-empted his own arrest to win some public sympathy. He had called me before going 
to jail. He seemed relaxed. Perhaps he had cut a deal with the party. Or maybe he didn’t realise that the 
party had made him the fall-guy. ‘It’s not so bad. If I pay, jail is like a hotel,’ he had told me. I saw the black 
car approach. My heart beating fast, I rushed out. She stepped out of the car. She had come in her work 
sari. ‘Wow, you have a bungalow?’ she said. It’s not “mine”, it’s “ours”, I wanted to tell her, but didn’t. She 
hugged me but looked serious. ‘All good?’ I said. ‘Raghav’s expose has created complete chaos. Even my 
family has been affected,’ she said. ‘What happened?’ I said. ‘But what is this, first come in!’ She came in 
and stepped on the new silk carpet I had laid out in her honour. She saw the huge TV, the velvet sofas and 
the eight-seater dining table. For a moment, she forgot about Raghav. ‘Your college is doing this well?’ she 
said, wide-eyed. ‘This is only the beginning,’ I said, and came forward to hold her. ‘With you by my side, 
see where I take it. University status in three years’ ‘Big man, Gopal. You have become a big man,’ she 
said. I shook my head. ‘For you, I am the same,’ I said. I kissed her on the forehead. I offered to show her 
the house. We went upstairs and saw each of the three bedrooms. My room had a king-size bed with a 
twelve-inch mattress. Next to the bed, I had kept a rocking chair similar to Baba’s. She kept quiet 
throughout my guided tour. Every time I showed her something, like the marble tiles or the split air-
conditioner, she looked suitably awed. However, she seemed more interested in watching the excitement 
on my face than the fittings. I threw myself on the bed. She sat on the rocking chair. We looked at the 
window as rain splattered on the panes. ‘Its raining,’ she said, excited.
‘Its an auspicious sign. The first time you came to our house,’ I said. She raised an eyebrow. ‘It is ours, not 
mine. I made it for us,’ I said. ‘Shut up. You didn’t know we would be together when construction started,’ 
she said and grinned. I smiled. ‘Correct. But I have done it up for us. Else, why would I need such a big 
house?’ ‘You are the director. It’s not a joke,’ she said. ‘You want to talk about Raghav?’ I said. I sensed 
she needed to. ‘We don’t have to’ she said and shook her head, putting on a brave smile. 'Come here,’ I 
said and patted the bed. She hesitated, but I extended my hand. She held it as I pulled her gently down. I 
kissed her, and she kissed me back with closed eyes. It wasn’t frantic or sexual. It was, if at all it is possible 
to kiss like that, chaste and pure. However, we kissed for a long time, our pace as gentle as the rain on the 
window. I felt her tears on my cheeks. I paused and held her shoulders. She hugged me and buried her face 
in my chest. It was what Aarti always did, and I loved it when she did that. It made me feel protective. 
‘What’s up, my love?’ I said to her. ‘I am happy for you, Gopal. I really am.’ ‘Us. Say happy for us,’ I said. 
She nodded, even as she fought back tears. ‘I am happy for us. And I don’t want to ruin your moment of 
showing me your house.’ ‘It’s fine,’ I said. ‘You have worked so hard to get here. You deserve this,’ she 
said. ‘What do you want to talk about?’ I said. She shook her head and composed herself. I waited for her 
to talk. ‘I’m fine. Girls are emotional. You will get used to my drama,’ she said. ‘I live for your drama,’ I 
said.
She smiled. ‘How’s Raghav?’ ‘They ruined his office’ she said. ‘Politicians are vindictive. Is he hurt?’ I said. 
‘No, thank god. The computer and the machines are all broken. He is trying to bring the issue out but 
there’s no money’ ‘He wants money? He can ask me,’ I said. I wished he would come and beg me on 
bended knees. ‘You know he’ll never do that. He wont even take money from me.’ ‘So?’ I said. ‘He’s trying 
to figure stuff out.’ ‘Are you still with me?’ I said. ‘Gopal!’ she said. ‘What?’ ‘I wouldn’t be sitting on your 
bed. I wouldn’t be, you know ...’ ‘Okay, okay,’ I said. I took a pillow and sat against the headrest. She sat 
on her haunches, facing me. ‘You have to stop asking me so much. Please understand this is difficult for 
me,’ she said. ‘What?’ I said. ‘Breaking up with him, especially at this time. And you want to break the 
news to him.’ ‘That’s life, Aarti,’ I said. I planned to go meet Raghav next week. ‘One should be sensitive 
...’ she said. ‘Nobody was sensitive to me when I didn’t clear my entrance exam two years in a row. 
Nobody gave a fuck when Baba died. I lived with it. Aarti, he will learn to face life.’ ‘You men ... why are 
you so competitive all the time?’ she said. ‘Me? Raghav is nothing compared to me today. Why would I 
compete with him?’ ‘We can still wait a few months ...’ she said but I cut her. ‘I cant bear you to be 
someone elses girlfriend,’ I said, my voice loud. ‘Really?’ she said, patting my cheek.
‘Not for another second,’ I said. I tugged at the loose end of her Ramada sari, bringing her close to me. 
We kissed. The rain grew insistent, noisy, thumping the window rhythmically. We kissed and, naturally, my 
hand went to her blouse. ‘Mr Director,’ she smiled, ‘I thought you said you didn’t want to have me until he 
was out of my system.’ ‘Isn’t he?’ I said. ‘Almost,’ she said, closing her eyes. ‘Well, maybe this will help get 
the remaining bits out,’ I said and brought her lips to mine again. I plundered her neck, planting as many 
kisses as the raindrops on the window. We undressed with a lot more awareness than the previous time. 
‘These are my work clothes, please keep them carefully,’ she said as I tried to fold the never-ending sari. 
Our naked bodies felt toasty in the cold weather. We huddled under the quilt and explored each other for 
hours. The rain stopped, started and stopped again. She wanted to get closer to me, perhaps to justify 
leaving Raghav. I wanted to show her how much she meant to me. I could give up this oversized house, the 
black car, the entire college for her. This time she looked me in the eye as she surrendered herself. We 
dozed off. ‘It’s six o’ clock,’ she said, peering into her mobile phone on the side-table. ‘Ten more minutes,’ 
I said, nuzzling her shoulder. ‘Lazy bones, wake up,’ she said. ‘And I am famished. Such a big house and 
nothing to eat!’ I sat up. Still groggy, I said, ‘There’s food. The cook made so many things for you. Let’s go 
downstairs.’ We had hot samosas, jalebis, masala cheese toast and hot chai. ‘This isn’t healthy,’ Aarti said. 
We sat on the dining table, facing each other. ‘Delicious in the rain though,’ I said. I switched on the lights 
as dusk fell. She ate in silence, digesting the food as well as what had just happened. I wanted to discuss 
the afternoon, but curbed my desire to blab about everything. Girls
don’t like to discuss intimate moments, especially if you probe them. However, they also get upset if you 
don’t refer to the moments at all. ‘Quite wonderful,’ I said. ‘The samosas?’ she said, even though she knew 
my context. ‘No, the jalebis,’ I said. She threw a piece of the curvy yellow sweet at me. ‘The best 
afternoon of my life,’ I said, after our laughter subsided. ‘That’s what all men want,’ she said. I realised I 
shouldn’t discuss the topic any longer, lest she fall into a bout of self-inflicted guiltinduced depression. 
‘Hey, you said Raghav's expose is affecting your family?’ I said. ‘Well, you know the CM fired Shukla, right? 
He didn’t resign or go to jail himself as he said on TV. The party told him to,’ she said. ‘I know,’ I said. She 
poured herself a second cup of tea. I imagined her living with me. How we would wake up in the morning 
and have tea in bed. Maybe we would have it on the terrace. Or in the lawns. I visualised us sitting on cane 
chairs and chatting for hours. I imagined her as the principal of the GangaTech College of Hospitality. The 
students would totally flirt with her, given she would be the cutest principal in history. I would expel them if 
they tried to ... ‘Are you listening?’ She tapped her cup with a spoon. ‘Huh?’ I said. ‘Sorry. Yeah, the party 
removed Shukla-ji. So?’ ‘The party doesn’t have a strong candidate for elections next year,’ Aarti said. 
‘They will find someone,’ I said. I finished my tea and kept the empty cup on the table. She poured me 
some more. I almost went into a dream sequence again. I controlled myself and listened to Aarti. ‘They 
need a candidate who can win. They can’t lose this city. It is the party’s prestige seat,’ she said. ‘What 
difference does it make to you?’    ‘They want dad’ Aarti said.
‘Oh!’ I said. I had forgotten about Aarti’s grandfather’s connection to the party. He had won the seat for 
thirty years. ‘Yeah. Now dozens of politicians visit everyday, begging him -Pradhan-ji, please contest.’ ‘He 
doesn’t want to?’ Aarti shook her head. ‘Why?’ I said. ‘He doesn’t like politics. Plus, his health is an issue. 
He can’t walk or stand for a long time because of his knees. How will he campaign and do those rallies?’ 
Aarti said. ‘True.’ ‘That’s not all,’ Aarti said, you haven’t heard the most ridiculous suggestion.’ ‘What?’ 
‘That I contest,’ Aarti said. She laughed hard, as if she had cracked a great joke. I didn’t find it funny. 
‘That’s,’ I said, ‘something to think about.’ ‘Are you crazy?’ Aarti said. ‘Me and politics? Hello? I thought 
you know me. They clipped my wings from flight attendant to guest relations. Now they will make me visit 
a thousand villages and sit with seventy-year-old men all day?’ ‘It’s power, Aarti,’ I said. ‘Means a lot in this 
country.’ ‘I don’t care about power. I don’t need it. I am happy,’ Aarti said. I looked into her eyes. She 
seemed sincere. ‘Are you happy with me?’ ‘I will be. We have to resolve some stuff, but I know I will be,’ 
she said, more to herself than to me. She left soon after that. Her parents had visitors, more party officials, 
who also wanted to meet Aarti. I dropped her home, so I’d get some more time with her. ‘You’ll be alone 
on the way back,’ Aarti pointed out. I shrugged. ‘Thanks for a lovely day,’ she said as we reached her 
house. ‘My pleasure,’ I said. ‘Have a good dinner with the politicians.’
‘Oh, please. Shoot me in the head,’ she said. Both of us stepped out of the car. I leaned on the bonnet as 
she walked towards her gate. ‘Sure you don’t want to become an MLA?’ I said from behind. She turned to 
me. ‘No way,’ she said. ‘Maybe my husband can, if he wants to.’ She winked at me before skipping 
towards her house. I stood there, surprised. Was she implying something? Did she want me to be the MLA? 
More specifically, did she want me to be her husband? Aarti, what did you say?’ I said. But she had already 
gone into her house.                                                            ? I hadn’t known that the Varanasi Central Jail had 
private rooms. I went to meet Shukla-ji in his cell. As requested, I brought him three boxes of fruits, two 
bottles of Johnnie Walker Black Label and a kilo each of salted cashewnuts and almonds. The cop who 
frisked me for security collected the parcel and promised to deliver it. I thought the MLA would meet me in 
the waiting area, but I could go right up to his cell. He sat in his room, watching a small colour TV and 
sipping cola with a straw. ‘Not bad, eh?’ he said. He spread his hands to show me the fifteen-by-ten-feet 
cell. It had a bed with clean sheets, a desk and chair, closets and the TV. Yes, it didn’t seem awful. It 
resembled a government guesthouse more than a jail. However, it couldn’t be compared to Shukla-ji’s 
mansion. ‘It’s terrible,’ I said. He laughed. ‘You should have met me in my early days in politics,’ he said. ‘I 
have slept on railway platforms.’ ‘I feel so bad,’ I said. I sat on the wooden chair. ‘Six months maximum,’ 
he said. ‘Plus, they get me everything. You want to eat from the Taj Ganga?’ I shook my head. ‘How is the 
car?’ he said. ‘Great,’ I said. ‘College?’ he said.
‘Going okay. We have slowed down a bit. We don’t have the capital,’ I said. ‘I will arrange the money,’ 
Shukla-ji promised. ‘Take it easy, Shukla-ji. Keep a low profile. Things can wait,’ I said. He switched off the 
TV. ‘Your friend fucked us, eh?’ Shukla-ji said. ‘He’s not my friend. And he is finished now. And you will be 
back,’ I said. ‘They won’t give me a ticket next time,’ he said pensively. ‘I heard,’ I said. ‘From who?’ 
Shukla-ji looked surprised. I told him about my friendship with Aarti, the DM s daughter, and what she had 
told me. I didn’t tell him about her relationship with Raghav, nor did I give details about her and me. ‘Oh 
yes, you have known her for long, right?’ he said. ‘School friend,’ I said. ‘So her father won’t contest?’ 
Shukla-ji said. I shook my head. ‘Neither will the daughter. She hates politics. So maybe you still have a 
chance,’ I said. ‘Not this time,’ Shukla-ji dismissed. ‘I have to wait. Not right after jail.’ ‘They’ll find 
someone else then?’ ‘The DM’s family will definitely win,’ he said. ‘People love them.’ ‘They aren’t 
interested,’ I said. ‘How close are you to her?’ His sharp question had me in a dither. I never lie to Shukla-ji. 
However, I didn’t want to give him specifics about Aarti and me either. I kept quiet. ‘You like her?’ he said. 
‘Leave it, Shukla-ji. You know I am immersed in my work,’ I said, evading the topic. ‘I am talking about 
work only, you silly boy,’ Shukla-ji said. ‘What?’ I said, amazed by how the MLA sustained his zest for 
politics even in jail.
‘You marry her. If that broken-legged DM can’t contest and the daughter won’t, the son-in-law will.’ 
‘What? What makes you say that?’ ‘I have spent twenty-five years in Indian politics. It is obvious that is 
what they will do. Wait and watch, they will marry her off soon.’ ‘Her parents are pestering her for 
marriage.’ ‘Marry her. Contest the election and win it.’ I kept quiet. ‘Do you realise where your GangaTech 
will be if you become an MLA? I will be back one day, anyway, maybe from another constituency. And if 
both of us are in power, we will rule this city, maybe the state. Her grandfather even served as CM for a 
while!’ ‘I haven’t thought about marriage yet,’ I lied. ‘Don’t think. Do it. You think she will marry you?’ he 
asked. I shrugged my shoulders. ‘Show her mother your car and money. Don’t take dowry. Even if the 
daughter doesn’t agree, the mother will.’ ‘Shukla-ji? Me, a politician?’ ‘Yes. Politician, businessman and 
educationist - power, money and respect - perfect combination. You are destined for big things. I knew it 
the day you entered my office,’ he said. Shukla-ji poured some Black Label whisky into two glasses. He 
asked the guard to get ice. I kept quiet and sat thoughtfully while he prepared the drinks. Sure, power is 
never a bad thing in India. To get anything done, you need power. Power meant people would pay me 
money, rather than me paying money to get things done. GangaTech could become ten times its size. Plus, 
I loved Aarti anyway. I would marry her eventually, so why not now? Besides, she had somewhat hinted at 
it. I let out a sigh. I fought my low self-esteem. It's okay, Gopal, I told myself. You are meant for bigger 
things. Just because you didn’t get an AIEEE rank, just because you didn't remember the molecular 
formula, doesn’t mean you can’t do great things in life. After all, I had opened a college, lived in a big 
house and had an expensive car. Shukla-ji handed me the drink. ‘I can get the girl,’ I said. ‘Cheers to that, 
Mr Son-in-law!’ Shukla-ji raised his glass.
Busy?’ I said. I had called Aarti at work. A tourist was screaming at her because the water in his room was 
not hot enough. Aarti kept me on hold while the guest cursed in French. ‘I can call later,’ I said. ‘It’s fine. 
Housekeeping will take care of it. My ears are hurting!’ Aarti said, rattled by all the screaming. ‘You will 
own a college one day. You won’t have to do this anymore.’ ‘It’s okay, Gopal. I really like my job. 
Sometimes we have weirdos. Anyway, what’s up?’ ‘How did the dinner go?’ ‘Boring. I dozed off on the 
table when the fifth guy wanted to inform me of the Pradhan family’s duty towards the party’ ‘Any 
conclusion on the ticket?’ ‘It’s politics, Director sir, things aren’t decided so fast. Anyway, election is next 
year.’ ‘You said something when you were saying bye,’ I said. I could almost see her smile. ‘Did I?’ she said. 
‘Something about your husband becoming the MLA?’ ‘Could be, why?’ she said, her voice child-like. ‘I 
wonder if I could apply?’ I said. ‘For the husband or MLA?’ she said. ‘I don’t know. Whichever has a shorter 
waitlist,’ I said. Aarti laughed. ‘For husband the queue is rather long,’ she said. ‘I am a bit of a queue 
jumper,’ I said. ‘That you are,’ she said. ‘Okay, another guest coming. Speak later?’ ‘I’m going to visit 
Raghav soon.’ ‘I have stopped talking to him,’ she said. She didn’t protest against my proposed meeting 
with him. I
took it as her consent. ‘Intentionally?’ I said. ‘Yeah, we had a bit of a tiff. I normally fix things up, I didn’t 
bother this time.’ ‘Good,’ I said. ‘So what’s the tourist saying?’ ‘She’s Japanese. They are polite. She will 
wait until I finish my call.’ ‘Tell her you are on the phone with your husband.’ ‘Shut up. Bye.’ ‘Bye,’ I said 
and kissed the phone. I opened the calendar on my desk and marked the coming Friday as the day for my 
meeting with Raghav.                                                              ? I pressed the nozzle of a Gucci perfume five 
times to spray my neck, armpits and both wrists. I wore a new black shirt and a custom-made suit for the 
occasion. I put on my Ray-Ban glasses and looked at myself in the mirror. The sunglasses seemed a bit too 
much, so I hung them from my shirt pocket. I had taken the day off on Friday. Dean sir wanted to bore me 
with a report of the academic performance of the students in the first term. I needed an excuse to get out 
anyway. All the best. Avoid hurt as much as possible, Aarti had messaged me. I assured her that I would 
handle the situation well. From her side, she had messaged him a ‘we need to talk’ equivalent and he had 
responded with a ‘not the best time’ message - exactly the kind of stuff that irked her about him in the first 
place. I told my driver to go to Nadeshar Road, where Raghav’s place of work was. One could easily miss 
the Revolution 2020 office in the midst of so many auto-repair shops. Raghav had rented out a garage. The 
office had three areas - a printing space inside, his own cubicle in the middle and a common area for staff 
and visitors at the entrance. ‘May I help you?’ a teenager asked me. ‘I am here to meet Raghav,’ I said. 
‘He’s with people,’ the boy said. ‘What is this about?’ I looked inside the garage. Raghav’s office had a 
partial glass partition. He sat on his desk. A farmer with a soiled turban and a frail little boy sat opposite 
Raghav. The father-son duo looked poor and dishevelled. Raghav listened to them gravely, elbows on the 
table.
‘It’s personal,’ I told the teenager before me. ‘Does he know you are coming?’ ‘No, but he knows me well,’ 
I said. Raghav noticed me then and stepped out of his cabin. ‘Gopal?’ Raghav said, surprised. If he was 
upset with me, he didn’t show it. Raghav wore a T-shirt with a logo of his newspaper and an old pair of 
jeans. He looked unusually hip for someone in a crisis. ‘Can we talk?’ I said. ‘What happened?’ Raghav said. 
‘MLA Shukla sent you?’ ‘No,’ I said. ‘Actually, it is personal.’ ‘Can you give me ten minutes?’ he said. ‘I 
won’t be long,’ I said. ‘I am really sorry. But these people have travelled a hundred kilometres to meet me. 
They have had a tragedy. I’ll finish soon.’ I looked back into his office. The child now lay in his father s lap. 
He seemed sick. ‘Fine,’ I said and checked the time. ‘Thanks. Ankit here will take care of you,’ he said. The 
teenager smiled at me as Raghav went inside. ‘Please sit,’ Ankit said, pointing to the spare chairs. I took 
one right next to Raghav s office. I chatted with Ankit to pass time. ‘Nobody else here?’ I said. ‘We had 
two more staff members,’ Ankit said, ‘who left after the office was ransacked. Their parents didn’t feel it 
was safe anymore. As it is, salaries are delayed.’ ‘Why haven’t you left?’ I said. Ankit shook his head. ‘I 
want to be there for Raghav sir,’ he said. ‘Why?’ I said.
‘He is a good person,’ Ankit said. I smiled even though his words felt like stabs. ‘The office doesn’t look 
that bad,’ I said. ‘We cleaned it up. The press is broken though. We don’t have a computer either.’ ‘You did 
such a big story,’ I said. ‘They fired an MLA because of you guys.’ Ankit gave me a level look. ‘The media 
ran with the story because they wanted to. But who cares about us?’ ‘How are you operating now?’ I said. 
Ankit opened a drawer in the desk. He took out a large sheet of paper with handwritten text all over it. ‘Sir 
writes the articles, I write the matrimonials. We make photocopies and distribute as many as we can.’ 
‘How many?’ I said. ‘Four hundred copies. It’s handwritten and photocopied; obviously not many people 
like that in a paper.’ I scanned the A3 sheet. Raghav had written articles on the malpractices by ration 
shops in Varanasi. He had hand-drawn a table that showed the official rate, the black market rate and the 
money pocketed by the shopkeeper for various commodities. I flipped the page. It had around fifty 
matrimonials, meticulously written by hand. ‘Four hundred copies? How will you get ads with such a low 
circulation?’ Ankit shrugged and did not answer. ‘I have to go to the photocopy shop,’ he said instead. ‘Do 
you mind waiting alone?’ ‘No problem, I will be fine,’ I said, sitting back. I checked my phone. I had a 
message from Aarti: ‘Whatever you do. Be kind.’ I kept the phone back in my pocket. I felt hot in my suit. I 
realised nobody had switched on the fan. ‘Where’s the switch?’ I asked Ankit. ‘No power, sorry. They cut 
off the connection.’ Ankit left the office, I removed my jacket and undid the top two buttons of my shirt. I 
considered waiting in my car instead of this dingy place. However, it would be too cumbersome to call the 
driver again. I had become too
used to being in air-conditioned environs. The hot room reminded me of my earlier days with Baba. As did, 
for some reason, the little boy in the other room who slept in his fathers lap. I looked again from the 
corner of my eye. The farmer had tears in his eyes. I leaned in to listen. ‘I have lost one child and my wife. I 
don t want to lose more members of my family. He is all I have,’ the man said, hands folded. ‘Bishnu-ji, I 
understand,’ Raghav said. ‘My paper did a huge story on the Dimnapura plant scam. They broke our office 
because of it.’ ‘But you come and see the situation in my village, Roshanpur. There’s sewage everywhere. 
Half the children are sick. Six have already died.’ ‘Roshanpur has another plant. Maybe someone cheated 
the government there too,’ Raghav said. ‘But nobody is reporting it. The authorities are not doing 
anything. You are our only hope,’ the farmer said. He took off his turban and put it on Raghav s desk. 
‘What are you doing, Bishnu-ji?’ Raghav said, giving the turban back to the hapless man. ‘I am a nobody. 
My paper is at the verge of closing down. We distribute a handful of handwritten copies, most of which go 
into dustbins’* ‘I told my son you are the bravest, most honest man in this city,’ Bishnu said, his voice 
quivering with emotion. Raghav gave a smile of despair. ‘What does that mean anyway?’ he said. ‘If the 
government can at least send some doctors for our children, we don’t care if the guilty are punished or 
not,’ the man said. Raghav exhaled. He scratched the back of his neck before he spoke again. ‘All right, I 
will come to your village and do a story. It will be limited circulation now. If my paper survives, we will do a 
big one again. If not, well, no promises. Okay?’ ‘Thank you, Raghav-ji!’ There was such hope in his eyes, I 
couldn’t help but notice. ‘And one of my friends’ father is a doctor. I will see if he can go to your village.’ 
Raghav stood up to end the meeting. The man stood up too, which woke up his son, and bent forward to 
touch Raghav's feet. ‘Please don’t,’ Raghav said. ‘I have a meeting now. After that, lets go to your village 
today itself. How far is it?’ ‘A hundred and twenty kilometres. You have to change three buses,’ the farmer 
said. ‘Takes five hours maximum.’
‘Fine, please wait then.’ Raghav brought them - the man and his weak and sleepy son - outside the office. 
‘Sit here, Bishnu-ji,’ Raghav said and looked at me. ‘Two minutes, Gopal? Let me clean up my office.’ I 
nodded. Raghav went inside and sorted the papers on his desk. The man sat on Ankit’s chair, facing me. 
We exchanged cursory smiles. ‘What’s his name?’ I said, pointing to the boy who was lying in his lap once 
again. ‘Keshav,’ the farmer said, stroking his son’s head. I nodded and kept quiet. I played with my phone, 
flipping it up and down, up and down. I felt for the duplicate Mercedes key in my pants pocket. I had 
especially brought it for the occasion. ‘Baba, will I also die?’ Keshav said, his voice a mere thread. 'Stupid 
boy. What nonsense,’ the farmer said. I felt bad for the child, who would not remember his mother when 
he grew up, just like me. I gripped the key in my pocket harder, hoping that clutching it will make me feel 
better. Raghav was dusting his desk and chair. His paper could close down in a week and he had no money. 
Yet, he wanted to travel to some far-flung village to help some random people. They had broken his office, 
but not his spirit. I clutched the key tighter, to justify to myself that I am the better person here. I realised 
the boy was staring at me. His gaze was light, but I felt disturbed, like he was questioning me and I had no 
answer. What have you become, Gopal? a voice rang in my head. I restlessly took out the sunglasses from 
my pocket and twirled them about. I suddenly noticed that the eyes of the boy, Keshav, were moving with 
the sunglasses. I moved them to the right, his eyes followed. I moved them to the left, his eyes followed. I 
smiled at him. ‘What?’ I pointed at my fancy shades. ‘You want these?’ Keshav sat up, feeble but eager. 
Though his father kept saying no, I felt a certain relief in handing over the sunglasses. ‘They are big for 
me,’ the boy said, trying them on. The oversized glasses made his face look even more pathetic.
I closed my eyes. The heat in the room was too much. I felt sick. Raghav was now on the phone. My mind 
continued to talk. What did you come here for? You came to show him that you have made it, and he is 
ruined? Is that the high point of your life? You think you are a better person than him, because of your car 
and suit? ‘Gopal!’ Raghav called out. ‘Huh?’ I said, opening my eyes. ‘What?’ ‘Come on in,’ Raghav said. I 
went into his office. I kept my hand in my pocket, on my keys. According to the plan, I was to casually 
place the keys on his table before sitting down. However, I couldn’t. ‘What’s in the pocket?’ Raghav said as 
he noticed that my hand would not come out. ‘Oh, nothing,’ I said and released the keys. I sat down to 
face him. ‘What brings you to Revolution 20201 Have we upset your bosses again?’ Raghav chuckled. ‘Oh 
wait, you said it is personal.’ ‘Yeah,’ I said. ‘What?’ Raghav said. I didn’t know what to say. I had my whole 
speech planned. On how Aarti deserved better than him, and that better person was I. On how I had made 
it in life, and he had failed. On how he was the loser, not me. And yet, saying all that now would make me 
feel like a loser. ‘Hows the paper?’ I said, saying something to end the awkward silence. He swung his 
hands in the air. ‘You can see for yourself.’ ‘What will you do if it closes down?’ I said. Raghav did not 
smile. ‘Haven’t thought about it. End of phase one I guess’ I kept quiet. ‘Hope I won’t have to take an 
engineering job. Maybe I will have to apply ...’ Raghav’s voice trailed into silence. I could tell Raghav didn’t 
know. He hadn’t thought that far. ‘I’m sorry, Gopal,’ Raghav said, ‘if I have hurt you in the past. Whatever 
you may think, it wasn’t personal.’
‘Why do you do all this, Raghav? You are smart. Why don’t you just make money like the rest of us?’ 
‘Someone has to do it, Gopal. How will things change?’ ‘The whole system is fucked up. One person can’t 
change it.’ ‘I know.’ ‘So?’ ‘We all have to do our bit. For change we need a revolution. A real revolution 
can only happen when people ask themselves - what is my sacrifice?’ ‘Sounds like your newspaper’s 
tagline,’ I mocked. He had no answer. I stood up to leave. He followed me out. I decided not to call my 
car, but to walk out into the lane and find it. ‘What did you come here for?’ Raghav said. ‘I can’t believe 
you came here to check on me.’ ‘I had work in the area. My car needed servicing. I thought I will visit you 
while it gets fixed,’ I said. ‘Nice of you to come. You should check on Aarti too sometimes,’ he said. I went 
on red-alert at the mention of her name. ‘Yeah. How is she doing?’ I said. ‘Haven’t met her in a while, but 
she seems stressed. I have to make it up to her. You should call her, she will like it,’ he said. I nodded and 
came out of his office. I lay down in my comfortable bed at night. However, I could not sleep a wink. There 
were three missed calls from Aarti. I didn’t call back. I couldn’t. I didn’t know what to say to her. How did it 
go? she messaged me. I realised she’d keep asking until I told her something. I called her. ‘Why weren’t 
you picking up?’ she said. ‘Sorry, I had the dean at home. He left just now.’ ‘You met Raghav?’ she asked 
impatiently.
‘Yeah,’ I sighed. ‘So?’ ‘He had people in his office. I couldn’t bring it up,’ I said. ‘Gopal, I hope you realise 
that until I break up with him, I am cheating on him with you. Should I talk to him?’ ‘No, no, wait. I will 
meet him in private.’ ‘And I need to speak to my parents too,’ she said. ‘About what?’ ‘I have three 
prospective grooms lined up for meetings next week. All from political families.’ ‘Have your parents gone 
insane?’ I exploded. ‘When it comes to daughters, Indian parents are insane,’ she said. ‘I can stall them, 
but not for long.’ ‘Okay, I will fix this,’ I said. I pulled two pillows close to me. 'See, this is what happens 
after sex. Roles reverse. The girl has to chase now.’ ‘Nothing like that, Aarti. Give me two days.’ ‘Okay. 
Else I am speaking to Raghav myself. And in case he asks, nothing ever happened between us.’ ‘What do 
you mean?’ I said. ‘I never cheated on him. We decided to get together, but only did so after the break-up. 
Okay?’ ‘Okay,’ I said. Sometimes I feel girls like to complicate their lives. ‘He will be devastated otherwise,’ 
she finished. I ended the call and lay down on the bed, exhausted. My eyes hurt due to the extra white 
clothes people had worn for the funeral. I looked at people’s faces. I could not recognise any of them. 
‘Whose funeral is it?’ I asked a man next to me.
We stood at the ghats. The body, I saw, was small. They took it straight to the water. ‘Why are they not 
cremating it?’ I asked. And then I realised why. It was a child. I went close to the body and removed the 
shroud. It was a little boy. In sunglasses. ‘Who killed him?’ I screamed but the words would not come out... 
I woke up screaming at the white ceiling of my bedroom and the bright lights I had forgotten to switch off. 
It was 3:00 a.m. Just a nightmare, I told myself. I tossed and turned in bed, but could not go back to sleep. I 
thought about Raghav. The guy was finished. His paper would shut down. He would find it tough to get a 
job, at least in Varanasi. And wherever he was, Shuklas men could hurt him. I thought about Aarti - my Aarti 
- my reason to live. I could be engaged to her next week, married in three months. In a year, I could be an 
MLA. My university approvals would come within the space of a heartbeat. I could expand into medicine, 
MBA, coaching, aviation. Given how much Indians cared about education, the sky would be the limit. 
Forget Aarti becoming a flight attendant, I could buy her a plane. If I played my cards right, I could also rise 
up the party ranks. I had lived alone too long. I could start a family, and have lots of beautiful kids with 
Aarti. They would grow up and take over the family businesses and political empire. This is how people 
become big in India. I could become really big. But what happens to Raghav? The dead-alive Keshav asked 
me. I don’t care, I told him. If he went down, it is because of his own stupidity. If he were smart, he would 
have realised that stupid bravado will lead to nothing. There would be no revolution in this country by 
2020. There wouldn’t be one by 2120! This is India, nothing changes here. Fuck you, Raghav. But Keshav 
was not done with me. What kind of politician will you be, Gopal? ‘I don’t want to answer you. You are 
scaring me, go away,’ I said out aloud, even though there was nobody in the room. Really, I knew that. 
What about Aarti? A voice whispered within me. I love her! What about her? Does she love you? Yes, Aarti 
loves me. She made love to me. She wants me to be her husband, I screamed in my head until it hurt. But 
will she love you if she knows who you really are? A corrupt, manipulative bastard? ‘I work hard. I am a 
successful man,’ I said aloud again, my voice startling me.
But are you a good person? The clock showed 5:00 a.m. Day was breaking outside. I went for a walk 
around the campus. My mind calmed a little in the fresh morning air. Little birds chirped on dew-drenched 
trees. They didn’t care about money, the Mercedes or the bungalow. They sang, for that was what they 
wanted to do. And it felt beautiful. For the first time, I felt proud of the trees and birds on the campus. I 
realised why Keshav kept coming to me. Once upon a time, I was Keshav - sweet, innocent and unaware of 
the world. As life slapped me about several times, and thrashed the innocence out of me, I had killed my 
Keshav, for the world didn’t care about sweetness. Then why didn’t I crush Raghav completely yesterday? 
Maybe that Keshav hasn’t died, I told myself. Maybe that innocent, good part of us never dies - we just 
trample upon it for a while. I looked at the sky, hoping to get guidance from above - from god, my mother 
or Baba. Tears streamed down my face. I began to sob uncontrollably. I sat down under a tree and cried 
for an hour. Just like that. Sometimes life isn’t about what you want to do, but what you ought to do.                                                        
? Shukla-ji was eating apples in the jail verandah. A constable sat next to him, peeling and slicing. ‘Gopal, 
my son, come, come,’ Shukla-ji said. He wore a crisp white kurta-pyjama that glistened in the morning sun. 
I sat on the floor. ‘Had a small favour to ask you,’ I said. ‘Of course,’ he said. I looked at the constable. 
‘Oh, him. He is Dhiraj, from my native place. Dhiraj, my son and I need to talk.’ The constable left. ‘I’ve told 
him I’ll get him promoted,’ Shukla-ji said and smiled. ‘I have come with a strange request,’ I said. 
‘Everything okay?’ ‘Shukla-ji, can you help me hire some ... call girls? You mentioned them long ago.’ 
Shukla-ji laughed so hard, apple juice dripped out of his mouth.
‘I am serious,’ I said. ‘My boy has become big. So, you want women?’ ‘It’s not for me.’ Shukla-ji patted my 
knee and winked conspiratorially. ‘Of course not. Tell me, how old are you?’ ‘I will turn twenty-four next 
week,’ I said. ‘Oh, your birthday is coming?’ he said. ‘Yes, on November 11,’ I said. ‘That’s great. You are 
old enough. Don’t be shy,’ he said, ‘we all do it.’ ‘Sir, it’s for the inspectors. We have a visit next week,’ I 
said. ‘I want to increase my fee. They control the decision.’ He frowned. ‘Envelopes wont do it for them?’ 
‘This one inspector likes women. I have news from other private colleges in Kanpur.’ ‘Oh, okay,’ Shukla-ji 
said. He took out his cellphone from a secret pocket in his pyjamas. He scrolled through his contacts and 
gave me a number. ‘His name is Vinod. Call him and give my reference. Give him your requirements. He’ll 
do it. When do you need them?’ ‘I don’t have the exact date yet,’ I said and began to stand up. ‘Wait,’ 
Shukla-ji said, pulling my hand and making me sit down again. ‘You also enjoy them. It gets harder after 
marriage. Have your fun before that.’ I smiled absently. ‘How is it going with the DM’s daughter?’ ‘Good,’ I 
said. I wanted to say bare minimum on the topic. ‘You are going to ask her parents? Or give her the love 
bullshit?’ ‘I haven’t thought about it,’ I said. ‘I have to go, Shukla-ji. There’s an accounts meeting today.’ 
Shukla-ji realised I didn’t want to chat. He walked me to the jail exit. ‘Life may not offer you the same 
chance twice,’ he said in parting. The iron door clanged shut between us. The calendar showed tenth 
November - my last day as a twenty-three-year-old. I spent the morning at
my desk. The students’ representatives came to meet me. They wanted to organise a college festival. I told 
them they could, provided they got sponsors. After the student meeting, I had to deal with a crisis. Two 
classrooms had water seepage in the walls. I had to scream at the contractor for an hour before he sent 
people to fix it. At noon my lunch-box arrived from home. I ate bhindi, dal and rotis. Alongside, I gave Aarti 
a call. She didn’t pick up. I had back-to-back meetings right after lunch. I wouldn’t be able to speak to her 
later. I tried her number again. ‘Hello,’ an unfamiliar female voice said. ‘Who’s this?’ I said. ‘This is Bela, 
Aarti’s colleague from guest relations. You are Gopal, right? I saw your name flash,’ she said. ‘Yeah. Is she 
there?’ ‘She went to attend to a guest. Should I ask her to call you?’ ‘Yes, please,’ I said. ‘Oh, and happy 
birthday in advance,’ she said. ‘How did you know?’ I said. ‘Well, she’s working hard to make your gift ... 
oops!’ ‘What?’ ‘Maybe I wasn’t supposed to tell you,’ Bela said. ‘I mean, it’s a surprise. She’s making your 
birthday gift. It’s so cute. She’s also ordered a cake ... Listen, she will kill me if she finds out I told you.’ 
‘Relax, I wont mention it to her. But if you tell me, I can also plan something for her.’ ‘You guys are so 
sweet. Childhood friends, no?’ she said. ‘Yeah, so what’s the plan?’ ‘Well, she will tell you she can’t meet 
you on your birthday. You will sulk but she will say she has work. However, after work she will come to 
your place in the afternoon with a cake and the gift.’ ‘Good that you told me. I will be at home then and 
not in meetings,’ I said. ‘You work on your birthday?’ she said. ‘I work all the time,’ I said. ‘Is she back?’
‘Not yet, I will ask her to call you,’ she said. ‘But don’t mention anything. Act like you don’t know 
anything.’ ‘Sure,’ I said and ended the call. It was time. I called Vinod. ‘Vinod?’ I said. ‘Who’s this?’ he said. 
‘I am Gopal. I work with MLA Shukla,’ I said. ‘Oh, so tell me?’ he said. ‘I want girls,’ I said. He cut the call. I 
called again but he didn’t pick up. I kept my phone aside. After ten minutes I received a call from an 
unknown landline number. ‘Vinod here. You wanted girls?’ ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘Overnight or hourly basis?’ ‘Huh?’ I 
said. ‘Afternoon. One afternoon.’ ‘We have happy-hour prices for afternoon. How many girls?’ ‘One?’ I 
said doubtfully. ‘Take two. I’ll give a good price. Half off for the other one.’ ‘One should be okay.’ ‘I’ll send 
two. If you want two, keep both. Else, choose one.’ ‘Done. How much?’ ‘What kind of girl do you want?’ I 
didn’t know what kinds he had. I had never ordered’ a call girl before. Did he have a menu? ‘S ... somebody 
nice?’ I said, like a total amateur. ‘English-speaking? Jeans and all?’ he offered.
‘Yes,’ I said. Indian, Nepali or white?’ he said. Varanasi wasn’t too far from the Nepal border. ‘You have 
white girls?’ I said. ‘It’s a tourist town. Some girls stay back to work. Hard to find, but we can do it.’ ‘Send 
me Indian girls who look decent. Who wont attract too much attention in a college campus’ ‘College?’ 
Vinod said, shocked. ‘We normally do hotels’ ‘I own the college. It’s okay.’ Vinod agreed after I told him 
about GangaTech, and how he had to bring the girls to the director’s bungalow. ‘So when do you need 
them?’ ‘Two o’clock onwards, all afternoon, till six,’ I said. ‘Twenty thousand,’ he said. ‘Are you crazy?’ I 
said. ‘For Shukla-jis reference. I charge foreigners that much for one.’ ‘Ten.’ ‘Fifteen.’ I heard a knock on 
my door. ‘Done. At two tomorrow. GangaTech on Lucknow Highway,’ I whispered and ended the call. ‘The 
faculty meeting,’ Shrivastava said from the door. ‘Oh, of course,’ I said. ‘Please come in, Dean sir.’ I asked 
the peon to place more chairs for our twenty faculty members. ‘Students tell me it’s your birthday 
tomorrow, Director Gopal,’ the dean said. The faculty went into orgasms. It’s fun being the boss. Everyone 
sucks up to you. ‘Just another day,’ I said. ‘The students want to cut a cake for you,’ the dean said.
‘Please don’t. I can’t,’ I said. The very thought of cutting a cake in front of two hundred people 
embarrassed me. ‘Please, sir,’ said Jayant, a young faculty member. ‘Students look up to you. It will mean 
a lot to them.’ I wondered if the students would still look up to me if they knew about my specifications to 
Vinod. ‘They have already ordered a ten-kilo cake, sir,’ Shrivastava said. ‘Make it quick,’ I said. ‘Ten 
minutes, right after classes end at one,’ the dean said. The faculty meeting commenced. Everyone updated 
me about their course progress. ‘Let’s look at placements soon,’ I said, ‘even though our passing out batch 
is two years away.’ ‘Jayant is the placement coordinator,’ the dean said. ‘Sir, I am already meeting 
corporates,’ Jayant said. ‘What is the response?’ I said. ‘We are new, so it is tough. Some HR managers 
want to know their cut,’ Jayant said. ‘Director Gopal, as you may know...’ the dean began but I interrupted 
him. ‘HR managers want a cut if they hire from our colleges, correct?’ I said. ‘Right, sir,’ Jayant said. Every 
aspect of running a private college involved bribing someone. Why would placements be an exception? But 
other members seemed surprised. ‘Personal payout?’ gasped Mrs Awasthi, professor of mechanical 
engineering. Jayant nodded. ‘But these are managers of reputed companies,’ she said, still in shock. ‘Mrs 
Awasthi, this is not your department. You better update me on applied mechanics, your course,’ I said. You 
are a strange customer,’ Roshni commented. ‘Shh!’ I said and slid between the two naked women.
Roshni quickly began to kiss my neck as Pooja bent to take off my belt. I started to count my breaths. On 
my fiftieth exhale I heard footsteps. By now the girls had taken off my belt most expertly and were trying 
to undo my jeans. On my sixtieth inhale came the knock on the door. On my sixty-fifth breath I heard three 
women scream at the same time. ‘Happy birt... Oh my God!’ Aarti’s voice filled the room. Roshni and Pooja 
gasped in fear and covered their faces with the bed-sheet. I sat on the bed, looking suitably surprised. Aarti 
froze. The hired girls, more prepared for such a situation, ran into the bathroom. ‘Gopal!’ Aarti said on a 
high note of disbelief. ‘Aarti,’ I said and stepped out of bed. As I re-buttoned my jeans and wore my shirt, 
Aarti ran out of the room. I followed her down the stairs. She ran down fast, dropping the heavy gifts 
midway. I navigated past a fallen cake box and scrapbook to reach her. I grabbed her elbow as she almost 
reached the main door. ‘Leave my hand,’ Aarti said, her mouth hardly moving. ‘I can explain, Aarti,’ I said. 
1 said don’t touch me,’ she said. ‘It’s not what you think it is,’ I said. ‘What is it then? I came to surprise 
you and this is how I found you. Who knows what ... I haven’t seen anything, anything, more sick in my 
life,’ Aarti said and stopped. She shook her head. This was beyond words. She burst into tears. ‘MLA Shukla 
sent them, as a birthday gift,’ I said. She looked at me again, still shaking her head, as if she didn’t believe 
what she had seen or heard. ‘Don’t get worked up. Rich people do this,’ I said. Slap! She hit me hard across 
my face. More than the impact of the slap, the disappointed look in her eyes hurt me more. ‘Aarti, what 
are you doing?’ I said. She didn’t say anything, just slapped me again. My hand went to my cheek in reflex. 
In three seconds, she had left the house. In ten, I heard her car door slam shut. In fifteen, her car had left 
my porch.
I sank on the sofa, both my knees useless. Pooja and Roshni, fully dressed, came down by and by. Pooja 
picked up the cake box and the scrapbook from the steps. She placed them on the table in front of me. 
‘You didn’t do anything with us, so why did you call a third girl?’ Roshni demanded to know. ‘Just leave,’ I 
told them, my voice low. They called their creepy protector. Within minutes I was alone in my house. I sat 
right there for two hours, till it became dark outside. The maids returned and switched on the lights. They 
saw me sitting and didn’t disturb me. The glitter on the scrapbook cover shone under the lights. I picked it 
up. ‘A tale of a naughty boy and a not so naughty girl,’ said the black cover, which was hand-painted in 
white. It had a smiley of a boy and a girl, both winking. I opened the scrapbook. ‘Once upon a time, a 
naughty boy stole a good girl’s birthday cake,’ it said on the first page. It had a doodle of the teacher 
scolding me and of herself, Aarti, in tears. I turned the page. The maids had prepared a lavish dinner with 
three subzis, rotis and dal. I didn’t touch it. I lay in bed and checked my phone. Aarti hadn’t returned my 
calls all day. However, I didn’t call her again. I thought again about my plan. At midnight, Aarti called me. 
‘Happy birthday to you,’ Aarti sang on the other line. ‘Hey, Aarti,’ I said but she didn’t listen. ‘Happy 
birthday to you,’ she continued to sing, elevating her pitch, ‘happy birthday to you, Gopal. Happy birthday 
to you.’ ‘Okay, okay, we are not kids anymore,’ I said. She continued her song. ‘Happy birthday to you. You 
were born in the zoo. With monkeys and elephants, who all look just like you,’ she said. She sang like she 
did to me in primary school. Corny as hell but it brought tears of joy to my eyes. I couldn’t believe I had 
made my plan.
‘Somebody is very happy,’ I said. ‘Of course, it is your birthday. That’s why I didn’t call or message you all 
day.’ ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘What “oh”? You didn’t even notice, did you?’ she sounded peeved. ‘Of course, I did. 
Even my staff wondered why my phone hadn’t beeped all day in office.’ I got off the bed and switched on 
the lights. ‘Anyway, I thought hard about what to give you, who has everything.’ ‘And?’ ‘I couldn’t figure 
out.’ ‘Oh, that’s okay. I don’t want anything.’ ‘Maybe I will buy you something when we meet,’ she said. 
‘When are we meeting?’ I said, even though Bela had told me her plans. ‘See, tomorrow is difficult, I have 
a double shift.’ ‘You won’t meet me on my birthday?’ I said. ‘What to do?’ she said. ‘Half the front-office 
staff is absent. Winter arrives and everyone makes excuses of viral fever.’ ‘Okay,’ I said. I must say, she 
could act pretty well. I almost believed her. ‘Happy birthday again, bye!’ she said. A number of birthday 
messages popped into my inbox. They came from various contractors, inspectors and government officials 
I had pleased in the past. The only other personal message was from Shukla-ji, who called me up. ‘May you 
live a thousand years,’ he said. ‘Thanks, you remembered?’ I replied. ‘You are like my son,’ he said. ‘Thank 
you, Shukla-ji, and good night,’ I said.
I switched off the lights. I tried to sleep before the big day tomorrow. Enough, enough,’ I said as the tenth 
student fed me cake. We had assembled in the foyer of the main campus building. The staff and students 
had come to wish me. The faculty gave me a tea-set as a gift. The students sang a prayer song for my long 
life. ‘Sir, we hope for your next birthday there will be a Mrs Director on campus,’ Suresh, a cheeky firstyear 
student, announced in front of everyone, leading to huge applause. I smiled and checked the time. It was 
two o’ clock. I thanked everyone with folded hands. I left: the main building to walk home. Happy 
birthday!: Aarti messaged me. Where are you?: I asked. Double shift just started.  she sent her response. 
Vinod called me at 2:15. My heart raced. ‘Hi,’ I said nervously. ‘The girls are in a white Tata Indica. They 
are on the highway, will reach campus in five minutes’ ‘I’ll inform the gate,’ I said. ‘You will pay cash?’ 
‘Yes. Why, you take credit cards?’ I said. ‘We do, for foreigners. But cash is best,’ Vinod said. I asked my 
maids to go to their quarters and not disturb me for the next four hours. I called the guardpost and 
instructed them to let the white Indica in. I also told them to inform me if anyone else came to meet me. 
The bell rang all too soon. I opened the front door to find a creepy man. Two girls stood behind him. One 
wore a cheap nylon leopard-print top and jeans. The other wore a purple lace cardigan and brown pants. I 
could tell these girls didn’t find western clothes comfortable. Perhaps it helped them fetch a better price. 
The creepy man wore a shiny blue shirt and white trousers. ‘These are fine?’ he asked me, man to man. I 
looked at the girls’ faces. They had too much make-up on for early afternoon. However, I had little
choice. ‘They are okay,’ I said. ‘Payment?’ I had kept the money ready in my pocket. I handed a bundle of 
notes to him. ‘I’ll wait in the car,’ he said. ‘Outside the campus, please,’ I said. The creepy man left. I 
nodded at the girls to follow me. Inside, we sat on the sofas. ‘I’m Roshni. You are the client?’ the girl in the 
leopard print said. She seemed more confident of the two. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘For both of us?’ Roshni said. 
‘Yeah,’ I said. Roshni squeezed my shoulder. ‘Strong man,’ she said. ‘What’s her name?’ I said. ‘Pooja,’ the 
girl in the hideous purple lace said. ‘Not your real names, right?’ I said. Roshni and Pooja, or the girls who 
called themselves that, giggled. ‘It’s okay,’ I said. Roshni looked around. ‘Where do we do it?’ ‘Upstairs, in 
the bedroom,’ I said. ‘Lets go then,’ Roshni said, very focused on work. ‘What’s the hurry?’ I said. Pooja 
was the quieter of the two but wore a fixed smile as she waited for further instructions. ‘Why wait?’ 
Roshni said.
‘I have paid for the entire afternoon. We’ll go upstairs when it is time,’ I said. ‘What do we do until then?’ 
Roshni said, a tad too aggressive. ‘Sit,’ I said. ‘Can we watch TV?’ Pooja asked meekly. She pointed to the 
screen. I gave them the remote. They put on a local cable channel that was playing Salman Khan’s Maine 
Pyaar Kiya. We sat and watched the movie in silence. The heroine told the hero that in friendship there is 
‘no sorry, no thank you,’ whatever that meant. After a while, the heroine burst into song, asking a pigeon 
to take a letter to the hero. Roshni started to hum along. ‘No singing, please,’ I said. Roshni seemed 
offended. I didn’t care. I hadn’t hired her for her singing skills. ‘Do we keep sitting here?’ Roshni said at 
three-thirty. ‘It’s okay, didi,’ Pooja said, who obviously loved Salman too much. I was surprised Pooja 
called her co-worker sister, considering what they could be doing in a while. The movie ended at 4 p.m. 
‘Now what?’ Roshni said. ‘Switch the channel,’ I suggested. The landline rang at four-thirty. I ran to pick up 
the phone. ‘Sir, Raju from security gate. A madam is here to see you,’ he said. ‘What’s her name?’ I said. 
‘She is not saying, sir. She has some packets in her hand.’ ‘Send her in two minutes,’ I said. I calculated she 
would be here in five minutes. ‘Okay, sir,’ he said. I rushed out and left the main gate and the front door 
wide open. I turned to the girls. ‘Let’s go up,’ I said. ‘What? You in the mood now?’ Roshni giggled. ‘Now!’ 
I snapped my fingers. ‘You too, Pooja, or whoever you are.’ The girls jumped to their feet, shocked by my 
tone. The three of us went up the stairs. We came to the
bedroom, the bed. ‘So, how does this work?’ I said. ‘What?’ Roshni said. ‘Is it your first time?’ ‘Talk less 
and do more,’ I said. ‘What do you do first?’ Roshni and Pooja shared a look, mentally laughing at me. 
‘Remove your clothes,’ Roshni said. I took off my shirt. ‘You too,’ I said to both of them. They hesitated 
for a second, as I had left the door slightly ajar. ‘Nobody’s home,’ I said. The girls took off their clothes. I 
felt too tense to notice any details. Roshni clearly had the heavier, bustier frame. Pooja’s petite frame 
made her appear malnourished. ‘Get into bed,’ I ordered. The two, surprised by my less than amorous 
tone, crept into bed like scared kittens. ‘You want us to do it?’ Roshni asked, trying to grasp the situation. 
‘Lesbian scene?’ ‘Wait,’ I said. I ran to the bedroom window. I saw a white Ambassador car with a red light 
park outside. Aarti stepped out, and rang the bell once. When nobody answered, she came on to the lawn. 
She had a large scrapbook in her hand, along with a box from the Ramada bakery. I lost sight of her as she 
came into the house. You are a strange customer,’ Roshni commented. ‘Shh!’ I said and slid between the 
two naked women. Roshni quickly began to kiss my neck as Pooja bent to take off my belt. I started to 
count my breaths. On my fiftieth exhale I heard footsteps. By now the girls had taken off my belt most 
expertly and were trying to undo my jeans. On my sixtieth inhale came the knock on the door. On my sixty-
fifth breath I heard three women scream at the same time. ‘Happy birt... Oh my God!’ Aarti’s voice filled 
the room. Roshni and Pooja gasped in fear and covered their faces with the bed-sheet. I sat on the bed, 
looking suitably surprised. Aarti froze. The hired girls, more prepared for such a situation, ran into the
bathroom. ‘Gopal!’ Aarti said on a high note of disbelief. ‘Aarti,’ I said and stepped out of bed. As I re-
buttoned my jeans and wore my shirt, Aarti ran out of the room. I followed her down the stairs. She ran 
down fast, dropping the heavy gifts midway. I navigated past a fallen cake box and scrapbook to reach her. 
I grabbed her elbow as she almost reached the main door. ‘Leave my hand,’ Aarti said, her mouth hardly 
moving. ‘I can explain, Aarti,’ I said. 1 said don’t touch me,’ she said. ‘It’s not what you think it is,’ I said. 
‘What is it then? I came to surprise you and this is how I found you. Who knows what ... I haven’t seen 
anything, anything, more sick in my life,’ Aarti said and stopped. She shook her head. This was beyond 
words. She burst into tears. ‘MLA Shukla sent them, as a birthday gift,’ I said. She looked at me again, still 
shaking her head, as if she didn’t believe what she had seen or heard. ‘Don’t get worked up. Rich people do 
this,’ I said. Slap! She hit me hard across my face. More than the impact of the slap, the disappointed look 
in her eyes hurt me more. ‘Aarti, what are you doing?’ I said. She didn’t say anything, just slapped me 
again. My hand went to my cheek in reflex. In three seconds, she had left the house. In ten, I heard her car 
door slam shut. In fifteen, her car had left my porch. I sank on the sofa, both my knees useless. Pooja and 
Roshni, fully dressed, came down by and by. Pooja picked up the cake box and the scrapbook from the 
steps. She placed them on the table in front of me. ‘You didn’t do anything with us, so why did you call a 
third girl?’ Roshni demanded to know. ‘Just leave,’ I told them, my voice low. They called their creepy 
protector. Within minutes I was alone in my house. I sat right there for two hours, till it became dark 
outside. The maids returned and switched on the
lights. They saw me sitting and didn’t disturb me. The glitter on the scrapbook cover shone under the lights. 
I picked it up. ‘A tale of a naughty boy and a not so naughty girl,’ said the black cover, which was hand-
painted in white. It had a smiley of a boy and a girl, both winking. I opened the scrapbook. ‘Once upon a 
time, a naughty boy stole a good girl’s birthday cake,’ it said on the first page. It had a doodle of the 
teacher scolding me and of herself, Aarti, in tears. I turned the page. ‘The naughty boy, however, became 
the good girl’s friend. He came for every birthday party of hers after that,’ said the text. The remaining 
album had pictures from all her seven birthday parties that I had attended, from her tenth to her sixteenth. 
I saw how she and I had grown up over the years. In every birthday party, she had at least one picture with 
just the two of us. Apart from this, Aarti had also meticulously assembled silly memorabilia from school. 
She had the class VII timetable, on which she drew horns above the maths classes. She had tickets from the 
school fete we had in class IX. She had pasted the restaurant bill from the first time we had gone out in 
class X. She had torn a page from her own slam book, done in class VIII, in which she had put my name 
down as her best friend. She ended the scrapbook with the following words: ‘Life has been a wonderful 
journey so far with you. Looking forward to a future with you - my soulmate. Happy birthday, Gopal!’ I had 
reached the end. On the back cover, she had calligraphed ‘G & A’ in large letters. I wanted to call her, that 
was my first instinct. I wanted to tell her how amazing I found her present. She must have spent weeks on 
it... I opened the cake box. The chocolate cake had squished somewhat, but I could make out the letters: 
‘Stolen: My cake and then my heart,’ it said in white, sugary icing, with ‘Happy birthday, Gopal’ inscribed 
beneath it. I pushed the cake box away. The clock struck twelve. ‘Your birthday is over, Gopal,’ I said loudly 
to the only person in the room.                                                         ? Even though I had promised myself I 
wouldn’t, I called Aarti the next day. However, she did not pick
up. I tried several times over the course of the week, but she wouldn’t answer. Once she picked up by 
accident. ‘How are you?’ I said. ‘Please stop calling me,’ she said. ‘I am trying not to,’ I said. ‘Try harder,’ 
she said and hung up. I wasn’t lying. I was trying my best to stop thinking of her. Anyway, I had a few things 
left to execute my plan. I called Ashok, the Dairtik editor. ‘Mr Gopal Mishra?’ he said. ‘How’s the paper 
doing?’ I said. ‘Good. I see you advertise a lot with us. So thank you very much.’ ‘I need to ask for a 
favour,’ I said to the editor. ‘What?’ the editor said, wondering if I would ask to suppress a story. ‘I want 
you to hire someone,’ I said. ‘He’s good.’ ‘Who?’ ‘Raghav Kashyap.’ ‘The trainee we fired?’ the editor said. 
‘Your MLA Shukla made us fire him.’ ‘Yeah, hire him back.’ ‘Why? And he started his own paper. He did that 
big Dimnapura plant story. Sorry, we had to carry it. Everyone did.’ ‘It’s okay,’ I said. ‘Can you re-hire him? 
Don’t mention my name.’ The editor thought it over. ‘I can. But he is a firebrand. I don’t want you to be 
upset again.’ ‘Keep him away from education. Rather, keep him away from scandals for a while.’ ‘I’ll try,’ 
the editor said. ‘Will he join? He has his paper.’
‘His paper is almost ruined. He has no job,’ I said. ‘Okay, I will call him,’ the editor said. ‘I owe you one. 
Book front page for GangaTech next Sunday,’ I said. ‘Thank you, I will let marketing know.’                                                   
? A week after my birthday Bedi came to my office with two other consultants. They had a proposal for me 
to open a Bachelor of Management Studies course. Dean Shrivastava also came in. ‘MBA is in huge 
demand. However, that is after graduation. Why not offer something before?’ Bedi said. The consultant 
showed me a presentation on their laptop. The slides included a cost-benefit analysis, comparing the fees 
we could charge, versus the faculty costs. ‘Business Management Studies (BMS) is the best. You can charge 
as much as engineering, but you don’t need facilities like labs’ one consultant said. ‘Faculty is also easy. 
Take any MCom or CA types, plenty of them available,’ said the other. I drifted off. I didn’t care about 
expansion anymore. I didn’t see the point of the extra crore we could make every year. I didn’t even want 
to be in office. ‘Exciting, isn’t it?’ Bedi said. ‘Huh? Yeah, can we do it some other time?’ I said. ‘Why?’ Bedi 
said. Then he saw my morose face. ‘Yes, we can come again,’ he agreed. ‘Let’s meet next week. Or 
whenever you have time.’ Bedi and his groupies left the room. ‘Director Gopal, are you not feeling well?’ 
the dean said. ‘I’m okay,’ I said. ‘Sorry to say, but you haven’t looked fine all week. It’s not my business, 
but I am older. Anything I can help with?’ ‘It’s personal,’ I said, my voice firm. ‘You should get married, sir. 
The student was right,’ he chuckled. ‘Are we done?’ I said. That cut his smile short. In an instant, he stood 
up and left.
My cellphone beeped. I had an SMS from Sailesh, marketing head of Dainih. Raghav accepted the offer. He 
joins tomorrow. Great, thank you very much, I replied. Hope our association becomes even stronger. 
Thank you for booking Sunday, texted Sailesh. The arrival of a black Mercedes in the Dainik office caused a 
minor flutter among the guards. A big car ensures attention. I stepped out and put on my new sunglasses. I 
went to the receptionist in the lobby. ‘I am here to meet Raghav Kashyap,’ I said, and gave her my business 
card. Tlie receptionist couldn’t locate him. Sailesh saw me from the floor above, and came running down 
the steps. ‘Gopal bhai? You should have informed me. What are you waiting here for?’ ‘I want to meet 
Raghav,’ I said. ‘Oh, sure,’ he said, please come with me.’ We walked up to Raghav’s cubicle. An IT guy 
crouched under his desk, setting up his computer. Raghav had bent down as well to check the connections. 
‘You re-joined here?’ I said. Raghav turned around. ‘Gopal?’ he said and stood up. ‘I had come to the 
marketing department and saw you.’ I turned to Sailesh. ‘Thank you, Sailesh.’ ‘Okay,’ Sailesh said. ‘See 
you, Gopal bhai.’ After he left, Raghav said, ‘It’s strange. The editor called me himself. I had no money 
anyway. Thought I will rejoin until I have enough to relaunch Revolution 20201 ‘Can we go for a cup of 
tea?’ I said. ‘Sure,’ he said. We walked up to the staff canteen on the second floor. Framed copies of old 
newspaper issues adorned the walls. Dozens of journalists sat with their dictaphones and notebooks, 
enjoying evening snacks. I could tell Raghav felt out of place. ‘I’m used to a small office now, Dainik is 
huge,’ he said. He bought two plates of samosas and tea. I
offered to pay but he declined. ‘Cog-in-the-wheel feeling, eh?’ I said. ‘Not only that. The stuff we did at 
Revolution 2020,1 can never do that here,’ he said. The stuff you did at your paper, I wanted to tell him, 
led to premature bankruptcy. However, I hadn’t come here to put him down. ‘It’s nice to have a job. Plus, 
you like journalism,’ I said. ‘That’s why I took it. A six-month trial for now.’ ‘Only six months?’ ‘They want 
me to edit other people’s stories. It is supposed to be more senior in title, but I like being a reporter. Let’s 
see.’ ‘A job pays the bills. Of course, it helps to be employed if you want to get married,’ I said. Raghav 
laughed. We hadn’t talked about personal stuff for years. However, he didn’t doubt my goodwill. That’s 
the thing with Raghav. He could unearth the biggest scams, but at another level, he trusted people so 
easily. ‘Who’s getting married?’ Raghav said, still laughing. ‘You and Aarti. Aren’t you?’ I said. I reminded 
myself I had to smile through this. Raghav looked at me. I had never discussed Aarti with him. In fact, I 
hadn’t discussed anything with him in years. ‘I hope I can talk to you as a friend? We were once, right?’ I 
said. I took a bite of the samosa and found it spicy as hell. Raghav nodded on a sigh. ‘Things aren’t going 
so well between me and Aarti.’ ‘Really?’ I faked surprise. ‘I haven’t spoken to her in weeks’ ‘What 
happened?’ I said. Raghav squirted tomato sauce over his samosa. ‘Its my fault. When the paper started, I 
didn’t give her enough time. Soon, we drifted apart. The last couple of months she seemed so 
disconnected,’ Raghav said. ‘Did you guys talk about it?’ I said.
‘No, we planned to, but didn’t,’ he said. ‘She loves you a lot,’ I said. ‘I don’t know,’ Raghav said. He twirled 
his samosa in the sauce without eating it. ‘She does. I know her from childhood, Raghav. You mean 
everything to her.’ Raghav seemed surprised. ‘Do I?’ ‘She wanted to marry you, isn’t it?’ ‘At the wrong 
time. Look at me, I am nowhere with respect to my career,’ Raghav said. ‘Your career is different from 
others. You can't measure it in money. In terms of helping people, you are doing quite well.’ ‘I blew that 
too,’ Raghav said. ‘You are fine. You are a sub-editor at a big paper. And if you marry Aarti, you can go 
far.’ ‘What do you mean?’ ‘You know there’s pressure on Aarti’s family to enter politics?’ I said. Raghav 
kept quiet. ‘You do, right?’ ‘I heard,’ he muttered. ‘So, Aarti’s father can’t and Aarti won’t. Son-in-law, 
maybe?’ Raghav looked up, intrigued. ‘How you think, man!’ I rolled my eyes. ‘I’m not smart. So, I have to 
make up for it in other ways’ ‘You are not smart?’ he said. ‘You do love her?’ I asked. ‘Things aren’t okay 
between us,’ he admitted. ‘You can fix them I am sure. After all, your charm worked on her the first time,’ I 
said. Raghav gave a shy smile. ‘Don’t call her. Go meet her at the hotel. Take an entire day off for her. 
That’s all she wants, your
time and attention. She’ll return your love ten , times over,’ I said, looking sideways. Raghav kept quiet. 
‘Promise me you will go,’ I, said and extended my hand. He shook my hand and nodded. I stood up to 
leave. I repeated Shukla-ji s line. ‘Life may not offer you the same chance twice.’ Raghav walked me to my 
car. He barely noticed the car though. ‘Why are you doing this for me?’ he asked. I got into the car. I rolled 
down the window. ‘Aarti is a childhood friend. Besides ...’ ‘Besides what?’ Raghav said. ‘Everyone has to 
do their bit,’ I said as the driver whisked me away.                                                           ? I didn’t keep in touch 
with Raghav after that. He called me many times. I either didn’t pick up or pretended to be busy. One of 
the times I did pick up, Raghav told me he and Aarti had started talking again. I told him I had inspectors in 
my office and hung up. I had sworn on Baba’s soul that I would never call Aarti. She didn’t either, apart 
from a single missed call at 2 a.m. one morning. I called her back, since technically, I had not initiated the 
call. She did not pick it. The missed call and call-back drama between men and women almost deserves its 
own user manual. I gathered she had made the call in a weak moment, and left her alone. I invited the 
boring consultants back for the BMS programme talks. The plan made a lot of sense. We started the 
process to expand into business studies. We had a new set of government people who had to approve our 
plans, and thus a new set of palms to be greased. We knew the business would be profitable. Millions of 
kids would be tested, rejected and spat out of the education system every year. We had to keep our net 
handy to catch them. I spent more time with the college faculty, and often invited them home in the 
evenings. They worked for me, so they laughed at my jokes and praised me every ten minutes. I couldn’t 
call them friends, but at least they filled the empty space in the house. Three months passed. We launched 
the BMS programme and, with the right marketing, filled up the seats in a matter of weeks. I rarely left the 
campus, and did so only to meet officials. Meanwhile, the case against Shukla-ji became more complex. He 
told me the trial could take years. He tried for bail, but the courts rejected it. Shukla-ji felt the CM had 
betrayed him, even as the party sent feelers that he
could be released from jail provided he quit politics. I went to meet him every month, with a copy of the 
GangaTech Trust accounts. One day, Raghav called me when I was at home. I didn’t pick up. Raghav 
continued to call. I turned the phone silent and kept it aside. He sent me a message: 'Where r u Gopal, 
trying 2 reach u.' I didn’t reply at first. I wondered if his repeated attempts meant trouble, like he had 
discovered another scam or something. I texted: In meetings. Wassup? His reply hit me like a speeding 
train. Aarti n I getting engaged. Wanted to invite u 2 party nxt Saturday. I couldn’t stop looking at this 
message. I had wanted this to happen. Yet, it hurt like hell. Unfortunately, I'm not in town. But 
congratulations!!!: I sent my response, wondering if I had put one exclamation mark too many. Raghav 
called me again. I avoided his call. He tried two more times, when I finally picked up. ‘How can you miss 
our engagement?’ he said. ‘Hey, am in a faculty meeting,’ I said. ‘Oh, sorry. Listen, you have to come,’ 
Raghav said. ‘I can’t. I am leaving for Singapore to explore a joint venture,’ I said. ‘What, Gopal? And why 
don’t you ever call back? Even Aarti says you are too busy whenever I ask about you.’ ‘I am really sorry. I 
am busy. We are doubling our student intake in the next two years,’ I said. ‘You will miss your best friends 
engagement? Won’t she be upset?’ ‘Apologise to her on my behalf,’ I said. Raghav let out a sigh. ‘Okay, I 
will. But our wedding is in two months. On the first of March. Please be in town then.’ ‘Of course, I will,’ I 
said and circled the date on the calendar. ‘I’ll let you attend to your staff. Take care, buddy,’ Raghav said. 
Instinctively, I composed a congrats!’ message to Aarti and sent it. She did not reply.
I looked around my big house as empty as my soul. On 1 March, I booked a room at the Taj Ganga. The 
fourth-floor room had a little balcony, with a view of the hotel pool and lawns. I had tossed the SIM card 
out of my phone two days ago. I had told my staff I had to go out of town. I stayed in my room the entire 
day. I came to the balcony at eight in the evening. In the faint light of dusk, I read the card again. Mrs and 
Mr Anil Kashyap Invite the pleasure of your company For the wedding of their beloved son Raghav with 
Aarti (D/O Mrs and Mr Pratap Brij Pradhan, DM) At 8 p.m. On 1March 2010. Poolside Lawns, Taj Ganga, 
Varanasi I could see the wedding venue downstairs. The entire garden area was littered with flowers and 
lights. Guests had started to arrive. In one corner the DJ was setting up the dance floor and testing music 
tracks. Along one side of the lawn were the food counters. Kids were jumping about on the two ornate 
chairs meant for the bride and groom on the small stage. The actual wedding pandal, where the ceremony 
would be held, was covered with marigold flowers. I stood there in silence, listening to the shehnai, faintly 
audible on the fourth floor. The baraat arrived at 9 p.m. Raghav sat on a horse. The DJ increased the 
volume of the music. I watched from above as Raghav’s relatives danced in front of the horse. Raghav 
wore a creamcoloured bandhgala suit. Even though I hate to admit it, he looked handsome even from this 
distance. I would have worn something more expensive, but still not looked so regal. I scolded myself for 
making comparisons again. Aarti arrived at the venue at nine-thirty. She walked slowly to the stage. A gasp 
of wonder shot across the crowd as they saw the most beautiful bride they had ever seen in their life. She 
looked like an angel, in an onion-colored lehnga with silver sequins. And even though I didn’t have 
binoculars, I could tell she looked perfect. During the ceremony, cousins gathered around Raghav and 
Aarti. They lifted the couple, making it difficult for them to garland each other.
I couldn’t bear it after the jai-mala ceremony. I had wanted to see Aarti as a bride, but I did not have to 
watch the whole wedding live. I came back into the room, shut the door and drew the curtains. I switched 
on the TV at full volume to drown out the sounds coming from outside. I replaced the SIM in my phone. 
Messages popped in one after another as the phone took its first breath in days. I had forty messages from 
the faculty, ten of them from the dean himself. Most of them talked about various issues in the college. 
Raghav had sent me five messages, asking me if I had received the card. I couldn’t tell how many missed 
calls he might have made. One message startled me the most. It came from Aarti. It said: Come. But only if 
you want to. I thought about replying, but remembered that she wont exactly be checking her phone on 
stage. I called the dean. ‘Where are you, Director Gopal?’ the dean said in a high-pitched voice. ‘We are so 
worried.’ ‘Dean Srivastava ... Dean Srivastava ...’ 'Gopal he said, sensing the tension in. my voice. 'Get me 
out of here,’ I broke down completely. ‘Where are you? Where are you?’ "Taj Ganga, 405 ... I don’t want 
to be here.’ ‘I am coming,’ he promised. In an hour I was seated beside the dean in his car and on my way 
back to campus. ‘So, what were ...’ he began but fell quiet. He understood, after one look at my face, that 
I didn’t want to talk. ‘Dean Shrivastava, I want to work hard. Let’s take GangaTech to new heights. I want 
us to be present in every field of education. Keep me busy. So busy that I don’t have time to think.’ ‘You 
are already so busy, sir.’ He looked troubled. ‘More. Why aren’t we in coaching classes?’ I said. ‘There’s 
money there. I want a proposal for engineering and MBA coaching. Okay?’ I said, my voice ringing.
‘Are you okay, Director Gopal?’ the dean said. ‘Are you listening to me? I want the proposal,’ I said, 
screaming loud enough to make the driver shift uncomfortably in his seat. ‘Yes, Director,’ the dean said. He 
dropped me home. I went straight to the bar near the dining table. I opened a new bottle of Black Label 
whisky we’d bought for the inspectors. I poured it out in a glass to the brim. Neat. The maids filed in. 
‘Where were you, sahib?’ they said. ‘I had work,’ I said. The whisky tasted bitter, but I swallowed it all. 
‘Dinner?’ I shook my head. The maids left the room. I went to the bookshelf and took out the scrapbook. I 
poured myself another glass. I drank half of it in one gulp, but when my body rejected it, 1 had to spit it 
out. I fell on the floor. I used the scrapbook as a pillow and went off to Epilogue I checked the time. The 
hospital clock showed 6.00 a.m. 'So getting drunk and crashing down is a habit,’ I said. Gopal gave me a sly 
smile. ‘That’s the only time it happened’ he said. ‘Apart from tonight, of course.’ I saw Gopal’s face. He 
seemed young enough to look like a student. Yet, his face had the hard coating of experience, of bitter 
lessons from life that made him appear older than his biological age. ‘So, Aarti and Raghav got married a 
year ago?’ I said. 'A year and twenty days,’ he said. ‘What has happened since?’ I said. ‘Shukla-ji is still in 
jail. I meet him every month. I am trying to buy back his share of the college with my earnings and make it 
my own college. He needs money for his other businesses. Let’s see.’ ‘What about Raghav and Aarti?’ I 
asked.
‘I am not in touch. I stay in my college. Elections are in two months. He is the one.’ ‘Meaning?’ ‘Raghav’s 
contesting. His picture is on election posters all over the city,’ Gopal said. ‘It could have been you. How do 
you feel about that?’ I said. Gopal shrugged. ‘He’ll be a better MLA than me. What would I have done? 
Made more money. With him, there is a chance he could change something.’ ‘That’s generous of you,’ I 
said. Gopal sat up straight and restlessly removed the sheets off him. ‘But I am still not a good person, 
right?’ he said. ‘I never said that,’ I said. ‘I told you, I am not worthy enough to he a hero in your story! 
Gopal said. I kept quiet. ‘I could be the villain,’ said Gopal, his eyes sparkling. 'I’ll let the readers decide how 
they want to consider you. I simply write about people. 1 don’t cast them as heroes or villains,’ I said. 
'Raghav is a good man. I am not half as good as him,’ Gopal said. 'Stop judging yourself’ I said. ‘Chetan-ji, 
put your hand on your heart, and tell me, am I a good man?’ I realised my approval meant a lot to him. Yet, 
I wanted to be genuine. I thought about it for a while. ‘Forget it, sir. Don’t answer it. Let’s take a walk! He 
got off the bed. He seemed much better. We took a morning stroll in the hospital lawns. ‘Never drink so 
much again, promise me,’ I said. 'I won’t,’ he said. ‘Promise me you will find somebody,’ I said. He shook 
his head. ‘That I can’t promise.’
‘Do you miss her?’ I said. He kept quiet. ‘Did you meet her after her marriage?’ He shook his head. I figured 
out now why he had hesitated to come to Ramada to drop me. I checked the time. I had a flight in two 
hours. I had to rush to the hotel, pack and head to the airport. '1 have to leave,’ 1 said. He nodded. He 
came out to drop me to the car. ‘The revolution will come,’ Gopal said. ‘We will have a better nation one 
day ’ ‘I know,’ I said. ‘You also write about it. Once GangaTech becomes big, I will try to fix the system. I 
am sick of giving envelopes to people.’ "We have to change things,’ I said. ‘Everyone must sacrifice for it,’ 
Gopal said. ‘Yes, I agree,’ I said as the driver started the car. ‘Bye, sir,’ Gopal said as I left.                                                   
? I rushed back to my room and packed fast. I came downstairs in the hotel lobby to check out. ‘Did you 
have a good stay, sir?’ a pretty girl in a sari asked me. ‘Yeah, memorable,’ I said. I saw her name tag. It 
said: ‘Aarti Kashyap. Guest Relations Officer’. She smiled. ‘Happy to hear that, sir.’ My car drove out of the 
Cantonment area. I saw a huge political party hoarding at the traffic signal. I couldn’t read from a 
distance, but I saw a young candidate’s picture. I called Gopal. ‘All okay, sir. Will you make it in time for 
your flight?’ 'Yes... Gopal?’ ‘What?’ he said.
